____________________

[8]Salutis Nostrae - Proclaiming a Universal Jubilee, by Pope Clement XIV, 30
April 1774

[9]Pope Clement XIV Clement, Bishop and Servant of the Servants of God.

1. Our Greetings and Apostolic Blessing to all the Faithful who read this
Letter.

Our salvation was accomplished when Our Lord Jesus Christ by His
passion and death rescued men from their ancient slavery to sin and
gave them life and freedom as sons of God, coheirs of His own glory. As
an additional benefit He has given them a means of expiating sin when
by the weakness of their nature and their own wickedness they
wretchedly abandon their excellent state as heirs of God. By giving to
the Prince of the Apostles the power of forgiving sins together with
the keys of the heavenly kingdom, He made it possible for sinners to be
restored to their former righteousness and to receive the fruits of
redemption.

2. Since this is the only way for sinners to recover divine grace and
salvation, the successors of Saint Peter have made it their chief
concern to summon all men to this fountain of mercy. They have done
this by offering the promise of forgiveness to the repentant and by
encouraging sinners by every means to seek remission.

Although this has been a constant concern of their Apostolic ministry,
they also wanted to establish some especially suitable times for
summoning sinners to repentance. In this way, they could make available
to all the treasure of indulgence entrusted to their keeping.
Accordingly, so as not to deprive any generation of the great benefit
of propitiation, they decided to celebrate every twenty-five years a
holy year of jubilee, a year of forgiveness and grace. They established
this merciful refuge in this holy city. We follow this salutary custom
in announcing that the year which is now approaching will be a Holy
Year. We urge you to effect salvation for your souls by utilizing the
aids which are available for your sanctification. We shall unlock all
the riches of mercy proceeding from the blood of Christ which have been
entrusted to Our dispensing. Moreover We shall open for you the rich
store of satisfaction formed by the merits of the most holy mother of
God and the apostles, by the blood of the martyrs and by the virtuous
actions of all good men; this will render peace and forgiveness more
accessible. For assuredly, as we are gathered together in the one body
of the Church which is the Body of Christ, we are joined with the
illustrious society and communion of the saints. All of us are cleansed
and made alive by the blood of Christ, and we can benefit each other.
For Christ has desired that His great love and mercy and the infinite
force of His passion and merits should be made more resplendent by the
addition of the other parts of His mystical body. In this way men
should be helped both by reciprocal action among themselves and by the
sharing of benefits flowing from that source of grace. Then God would
be moved to show clemency to us for the sake of His Son's goodness and
the infinite value of His blood, as well as by the merits of the saints
and by prayerful petition.

So We summon you to share in this richness of indulgence, in these
treasures of the Church. In accordance with traditional practice, and
in agreement with the [10]cardinals, by the authority of Almighty God,
of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, and of Ourselves, for the glory
of God, the exaltation of the Catholic Church and the sanctification of
the entire Christian people, We proclaim and promulgate that the great
universal jubilee of the Holy Year is to be celebrated in Rome next
year, 1775, beginning at first Vespers on this Christmas Eve and
lasting a full year.

3. During this year of jubilee We grant and impart in the Lord a full
indulgence, remission, and forgiveness of all their sins to all the
faithful of either sex who confess their sins with true repentance,
receive Holy Communion, and devoutly visit the city basilicas of Saints
Peter and Paul, Saint John Lateran, and Saint Mary Major; in addition,
they must pray to God for the exaltation of Holy Church, the
destruction of heresies, peace among Catholic rulers, and the safety
and quiet of the Christian people. Roman and residents of Rome must
make their visits on thirty different days. These can be in broken or
unbroken sequence and can be reckoned in natural or ecclesiastical
days, that is, a day measured from the first vespers of one day to the
end of vespers the next evening. Pilgrims or other non-residents should
make at least fifteen such visits.

4. Some of those who set out for Rome with this purpose may not be able
to fulfill the condition of visiting the basilicas for the requisite
number of days either because they die on the way or are prevented by
illness or some other lawful reason.

We therefore decree that they share in the same indulgence and
remission when they have confessed their sins and received Holy
Communion as if they had actually visited the basilicas on the
prescribed days. Although hindered by the necessities mentioned, they
still obtain their desired goal.

5. Do not let these days of salvation pass by without using the great
opportunity to appease divine justice and obtain grace. For it is not
fitting that you should be less eager in obtaining the abundance of
heavenly grace and in visiting the courts of the Lord than men greedy
for profit or zealous for travel. Yet these allow no inconveniences or
hindrances to detain them. The very labors, if they are undertaken with
the proper intentions, can be of great assistance in gathering the rich
fruits of penance. It was for this reason that the Church has always
regarded the ancient custom of making pilgrimages as very beneficial.
The troubles and weariness incurred in the course of pilgrimage make
reparation for past sins and strengthen the desire of repentance. Even
if ardent resolution and love for God remove or lighten your experience
of such troubles, this eagerness of spirit is very powerful in
obtaining forgiveness and is accounted part of the satisfaction due for
sins since much is forgiven the one who loves much.

Therefore, go up to the city of Sion and be filled with the riches of
the Lord's house. The sight of this city of faith and home of piety,
the tombs of the apostles, and the reminders of the martyrs will move
you to repentance which appeases God. When you gaze on the earth which
was stained by their blood and on the traces of their holiness which
are everywhere to be seen, you will inevitably repent of your poor
imitation of the practices and laws which they followed and which you
profess to follow. The majesty of the churches and the dignity of their
divine service will remind you that you are the temple of the living
God; they will increase your zeal to adorn with the gifts of divine
grace this temple which you were formerly inclined to defile, grieving
the Holy Spirit. You will also be inspired to piety and repentance by
the tears of others who bewail their sins and by the groans of men
beseeching forgiveness from God. But in your sadness and grief, the
very crowd of peoples and races assembled for the works of penance and
justice will cause you joy. For this will be the most delightful and
beautiful sight, foreshadowing in public view the triumph of the Cross
and religion. Our own joy at this universal assembly of the Church's
children will be especially great. We consider that your striving in
love and piety promises great aid and assistance to Ourselves. For We
trust that you will remember your most loving father in your prayers to
God. We also trust that when you join Us in prayer for the safety of
the Catholic faith, for the return of all peoples who have strayed from
its unity, for the peace of the Church, and for the happiness of
Christian princes, you will assist Us to support the weight of Our
office.

6. Venerable brothers, patriarchs, primates, archbishops, and bishops,
assist Us in these concerns and proclaim this time of repentance and
reconciliation to the peoples entrusted to your care. By means of
diligence and influence, see to it that this opportunity of obtaining
forgiveness, which making available to all, occasions the greatest
benefit for the salvation of souls. Let them know what works of
Christian humility and mercy they should perform to prepare themselves
for gathering this great harvest of heavenly grace. Let them understand
by your words and your example that they should fast, pray, and give
[11]alms. All of you who will add this task to your pastoral cares
should bring a section of your flock to this citadel of religion and
source of mercy, to Our fatherly welcome and embrace. Your visit will
add luster to Our celebration and you will, of course, obtain great
stores of divine mercy from so fine and laborious an undertaking. You
will carry home those stores like rich cargo and joyfully share them
with the rest of your people.

7. We are perfectly sure that Our beloved sons in Christ, the
emperor-elect and all Catholic kings and princes, will use their
authority to assist Us in ensuring that Our plans for the salvation of
souls will enjoy the great success which We desire. So We strongly urge
and beseech them in their zeal for religion to act in unison with the
bishops, and provide safe roads and inns for the pilgrims. They know
well that these actions will benefit the peace of the realm and that
God Himself will be appeased and favorable towards them in accordance
with their own care to increase His glory among the people.

8. In order that this letter may more readily come to the knowledge of
all the faithful in every place, We wish printed copies of it, signed
by the public notary and with the seal of a person of ecclesiastical
rank affixed, to be accepted exactly as if they were the original.

9. May no one be permitted to curtail this expression of Our
proclamation, promulgation, concession, exhortation, request and desire
or act against it in rash daring. But if anyone tries to do so he knows
he will incur the wrath of Almighty God and of His blessed apostles,
Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome in Saint Mary Major's, 30 April 1744 in the fifth year of
Our pontificate.

