____________________

[9]Letter to the Bishops Appointed in Campania, Picenum, Etruria, and all the
Provinces, by Pope Saint Leo the Great

1. Leo, bishop of the city of Rome, to all
the bishops appointed in Campania, Picenum, Etruria, and all the
provinces, greeting in the LORD.

I. Introduction. As the peaceful settlement of the churches causes us
satisfaction, so are we saddened with no slight sorrow whenever we
learn that anything has been taken for granted or done contrary to the
ordinances of the canons and the discipline of the Church: and if we do
not repress such things with the vigilance we ought, we cannot excuse
ourselves to Him who intended us to be watchmen, for permitting the
pure body of the Church, which we ought to keep clean from every stain,
to be defiled by contact with wicked schemers, since the framework of
the members loses its harmony by such dissimulation.

II. Slaves and serfs (coloni) are not to be ordained. Men are admitted
commonly to the Sacred Order who are not qualified by any dignity of
birth or character: even some who have failed to obtain their liberty
from their masters are raised to the rank of the priesthood, as if
sorry slaves were fit for that honour; and it is believed that a man
can be approved of God who has not yet been able to approve himself to
his master. And so the cause for complaint is twofold in this matter,
because both the sacred ministry is polluted by such poor partners in
it, and the rights of masters are infringed so far as unlawful
possession is rashly taken of them. From these men, therefore, beloved
brethren, let all the priests of your province keep aloof; and not only
from them, but from others also, we wish you to keep, who are under the
bond of origin or other condition of service: unless perchance the
request or consent be intimated of those who claim some authority over
them. For he who is to be enrolled on the divine service ought to be
exempt from others, that he be not drawn away from the LORD'S camp in
which his name is entered, by any other bonds of duty.

III. A man who has married twice or a widow is not eligible as a
priest. Again, when each man's respectability of birth and conduct has
been established, what sort of person should be associated with the
ministry of the Sacred Altar we have learnt both from the teaching of
the Apostle and the Divine precepts and the regulations of the canons,
from which we find very many of the brethren have turned aside and
quite gone out of the way. For it is well known that the husbands of
widows have attained to the priesthood: certain, too, who have had
several wives, and have led a life given up to all licentiousness, have
had all facilities put in their way, and been admitted to the Sacred
Order, contrary to that utterance of the blessed Apostle, in which he
proclaims and says to such, "the husband of one wife," and contrary to
that precept of the ancient law which says by way of caution: "Let the
priest take a virgin to wife, not a widow, not a divorced woman." All
such persons, therefore, who have been admitted we order to be put out
of their offices in the church and from the title of priest by the
authority of the Apostolic See: for they will have no claim to that for
which they were not eligible, on account of the obstacle in question:
and we specially claim for ourselves the duty of settling this, that if
any of these irregularities have been committed, they may be corrected
and may not be allowed to occur again, and that no excuse may arise
from ignorance: although it has never been allowed a priest to be
ignorant of what has been laid down by the rules of the canons. These
writings, therefore, we have addressed to your provinces by the hand of
Innocent, Legitimus and Segetius, our brothers and fellow-bishops: that
the evil shoots which are known to have sprung up may be torn out by
the roots, and no tares may spoil the LORD'S harvest. For thus all that
is genuine will bear much fruit, if that which has been wont to kill
the growing crop be carefully cleared away.

IV. Usurious practices forbidden for clergy and for laity. This point,
too, we have thought must not be passed over, that certain possessed
with the love of base gain lay out their money at interest, and wish to
enrich themselves as usurers. For we are grieved that this is practiced
not only by those who belong to the clergy, but also by laymen who
desire to be called Christians. And we decree that those who have been
convicted be punished sharply, that all occasion of sinning be removed.

V. A cleric may not make money in another's name any more than in his
own. The following warning, also, we have thought fit to give, that no
cleric should attempt to make money in another's name any more than in
his own: for it is unbecoming to shield one's crime under another man's
gains. Nay, we ought to look at and aim at only that usury whereby what
we bestow in mercy here we may recover from the LORD, who will restore
a thousand fold what will last for ever.

VI. Any bishop who refuses consent to these rules must be deposed. This
admonition of ours, therefore, proclaims that if any of our brethren
endeavour to contravene these rules and dare to do what is forbidden by
them, he may know that he is liable to deposition from his office, and
that he will not be a sharer in our communion who refuses to be a
sharer of our discipline. But lest there be anything which may possibly
be thought to be omitted by us, we bid you, beloved, to keep all the
decretal rules of Innocent of blessed memory, and also of all our
predecessors, which have been promulgated about the orders of the
Church and the discipline of the canons, and to keep them in such wise
that if any have transgressed them he may know at once that all
indulgence is denied him. Dated 10th of October, in the consulship of
the illustrious Maximus (a second time) and Paterius (A.D. 443).

