____________________

[8]Si Diligis - Canonisation of Pope Saint Pius X, by Pope Pius XII, 31 May
1954

1. Venerable Brothers,

"If you love . . . feed." These words which are a command of our Divine
Redeemer to the Apostle Peter are the commencement of the Mass in honor
of one or more Supreme Pontiffs. They show clearly the meaning of
apostolic labor, its exalted virtue, and the reason for its merit.

Jesus Christ is the eternal High Priest and Shepherd of souls, Who
taught, labored, and suffered greatly for our sakes. Pius X, Bishop of
Rome, whom it has been Our great joy to enroll in the list of the
Saints, following closely in the footsteps of his Divine Master, took
that command from the lips of Christ and strenuously fulfilled it: he
loved and fed. He loved Christ and fed His flock. He drew abundantly on
the heavenly treasures which our merciful Redeemer brought to the
earth, and distributed them bountifully to the flock: namely, the
nourishment of truth. heavenly mysteries, the munificent grace of the
Eucharistic sacrament and sacrifice, charity, earnestness in governing,
fortitude in defense. He gave fully of himself and of those things
which the Author and Giver of all good things had bestowed on him.

Your presence in Rome, Venerable Brothers, and participation in these
solemn celebrations, gladdens Us. You have come in order that in union
with Us you may pay a tribute of admiration and honor to a Bishop of
the city of Rome whose life was the glory of the entire Church; and to
give thanks to Almighty God for those whom His paternal mercy, with a
great abundance of favors, guides to salvation through this Pontiff.

And now, beloved Brothers, as we stand among you gathered together from
all parts of the world, Our heart is overjoyed. We, that is, the Vicar
of Christ, one who is also an "ancient" among you "the ancients." What
We have to say to you We wish to sum up first of all in words taken
from the letter, which We have just quoted, of the first Supreme
Pontiff and Prince of the Apostles himself: "The ancients therefore
that are among you, I beseech, who am myself also an ancient and
witness of the sufferings of

Christ . . . feed the flock of God which is among you, taking care of
it not by constraint, but willingly according to God . . . being made a
pattern of the flock from the heart" (cf. I Pet. 5:1-3). These words
have the same purport as the Divine utterance: "If you love . . . feed
!" encouraging pastors to active charity in their ministry.

We wish to develop briefly what We have just summed up in the words of
Blessed Peter.

Care of all the Church, and the daily vigilance which Our supreme
office demands of Us, compel Us to consider and weigh certain ideas,
sentiments, and ways of acting. We draw your attention to them, and ask
you to unite your vigilant care with Ours, in order thus to provide
more quickly and effectively for the needs of Christ's flock. There are
evident the symptoms and effects of a certain spiritual contagion,
which require your pastoral care, in order that they may not spread,
but may be remedied in time and extirpated.

Our purpose will be best effected by explaining the triple office and
privilege, which by divine institution belongs to you, the successors
of the Apostles, under the authority of the Roman Pontiff (cf. can.
329): namely, of teacher, priest, and ruler. But since time will not
permit today, We will limit Ourselves to the first point, putting the
others off to another occasion, if God so permits.

Christ Our Lord entrusted the truth which He had brought from heaven to
the Apostles, and through them to their successors. He sent His
Apostles, as He had been sent by the Father (John 20:21), to teach all
nations everything they had heard from Him (cf. Matt. 28:19 f.). The
Apostles are, therefore, by divine right the true doctors and teachers
in the Church. Besides the lawful successors of the Apostles, namely
the Roman Pontiff for the universal Church and Bishops for the faithful
entrusted to their care (cf. can. 1326), there are no other teachers
divinely constituted in the Church of Christ. But both the Bishops and,
first of all, the Supreme Teacher and Vicar of Christ on earth, may
associate others with themselves in their work of teacher, and use
their advice; they delegate to them the faculty to teach, either by
special grant, or by conferring an office to which the faculty is
attached (cf. can. 1328). Those who are so called teach not in their
own name, nor by reason of their theological knowledge, but by reason
of the mandate which they have received from the lawful Teaching
Authority. Their faculty always remains subject to that Authority, nor
is it ever exercised in its own right or independently. Bishops, for
their part, by conferring this faculty are not deprived of the right to
teach; they retain the very grave obligation of supervising the
doctrine, which others propose, in order to help them, and of seeing to
its integrity and security. Therefore the legitimate Teaching Authority
of the Church is guilty of no injury or no offense to any of those to
whom it has given a canonical mission, if it desires to ascertain what
they, to whom it has entrusted the mission of teaching, are proposing
and defending in their lectures, in books, notes and reviews intended
for the use of their students, as well as in books and other
publications intended for the general public. In order to accomplish
this, We do not contemplate extending the prescriptions of canon law on
previous censorship of books to include all these kinds of teaching;
for there are many ways and means at hand for investigating and
acquiring accurate information on what professors are teaching. And
this care and prudence of the legitimate Teaching Authority does not at
all imply distrust or suspicion-(nor does the profession of faith which
the Church requires of professors and many others; cf. can. 1406, nn. 7
f.)-on the contrary, the fact that the office of teacher has been
bestowed implies confidence, high regard, and honor shown the person to
whom the office has been entrusted. Indeed the Holy See, whenever it
inquires and wishes to be informed about what is being taught in
various seminaries, colleges, universities, and institutions of higher
learning, in those fields which pertain to its jurisdiction, is led by
no other motive than the consciousness of Christ's mandate and the
obligation by which She is bound before God to safeguard and preserve
without corruption or adulteration sound doctrine. Moreover the
exercise of this vigilance aims also at protecting and upholding your
right and office of feeding with the genuine teaching of Christ and
with His truth the flock entrusted to your pastoral care.

Not without serious reason, Venerable Brothers, have We wished to
recall these things in your presence. For unfortunately it has happened
that certain teachers care little for conformity with the living
Teaching Authority of the Church, pay little heed to her commonly
received doctrine clearly proposed in various ways; and at the same
time they follow their own bent too much, and regard too highly the
intellectual temper of more recent writers, and the standards of other
branches of learning, which they declare and hold to be the only ones
which conform to sound ideas and standards of scholarship. Of course
the Church is very keen for and fosters the study of human branches of
learning and their progress; she honors with special favor and regard
learned men who spend their lives in the cultivation of learning.
However matters of religion and morals, because they completely
transcend truths of the senses and the plane of the material, pertain
solely to the office and authority of the Church. In Our encyclical
letter, Humani generis, We described the attitude of mind, the spirit,
of those whom We have referred to above; We also recalled to mind that
some of the aberrations from the truth which We repudiated in that
Encyclical had their direct origin in a neglect of conformity with the
living Teaching Authority of the Church. Time and again Saint Pius X,
in writings whose importance is known to all of you, urgently stressed
the need for this union with the mind and teaching of the Church. His
successor in the Supreme Pontificate, Benedict XV, did the same; in his
first Encyclical (Ad Beatissimi Apostolorum Principis, Nov. 1, 1914),
after solemnly repeating Pius' condemnation of Modernism, he thus
describes the attitude of mind of followers of that doctrine: "He who
is influenced by its principles disdainfully spurns whatever appears
old, and eagerly pursues the new: in his manner of speaking of divine
things, in performance of divine worship, in Catholic usages, even in
private devotions" (AAS VI [1914], 578). And if there are any
present-day teachers making every effort to produce and develop new
ideas, but not to repeat "that which has been handed down," and if this
is their whole aim, they should reflect calmly on those words which
Benedict XV, in the Encyclical just referred to, proposes for their
consideration: "We wish this maxim of our elders held in reverence:
Nihil innovetur nisi quod traditum est (Let nothing new be introduced
but only what has been handed down); it must be held as an inviolable
law in matters of faith, and should also control those points which
allow of change, though in these latter for the most part the rule
holds: Non nova sed noviter (Not new things but in a new way)."

As for the laity, it is clear that they can be invited by legitimate
teachers and accepted as helpers in the defense of the faith. It is
enough to call to mind the thousands of men and women engaged in
catechetical work, and other types of lay apostolate, all of which are
highly praiseworthy and can be strenuously promoted. But all these lay
apostles must be, and remain, under the authority, leadership, and
watchfulness of those who by divine institution are set up as teachers
of Christ's Church. In matters involving the salvation of souls, there
is no teaching authority in the Church not subject to this authority
and vigilance.

Recently what is called "lay theology" has sprung up and spread to
various places, and a new class of "lay theologian" has emerged, which
claims to be sui juris; there are professors of this theology occupying
established chairs, courses are given, notes published, seminars held.
These professors distinguish their teaching authority from, and in a
certain way set it up against, the public Teaching Authority of the
Church; at times, in order to justify their position, they appeal to
the charismatic gifts of teaching and of interpreting prophecy, which
are mentioned more than once in the New Testament, especially in the
Pauline Epistles (e.g. Rom. 12:6 f.; I Cor. 12:28-30); they appeal to
history, which from the beginning of the Christian religion down to
today presents so many names of laymen who for the good of souls have
taught the truth of Christ orally and in writing, though not called to
this by the Bishops and without having asked or received the sacred
teaching authority, led on by their own inward impulse and apostolic
zeal. Nevertheless it is necessary to maintain to the contrary that
there never has been, there is not now, and there never will be in the
Church a legitimate teaching authority of the laity withdrawn by God
from the authority, guidance, and watchfulness of the sacred Teaching
Authority; in fact, the very denial of submission offers a convincing
proof and criterion that laymen who thus speak and act are not guided
by the Spirit of God and of Christ. Furthermore, everyone can see how
great a danger of confusion and error there is in this "lay theology";
a danger also lest others begin to be taught by men clearly unfitted
for the task, or even by deceitful and fraudulent men, whom Saint Paul
described: "The time will come when men . . ., always itching to hear
something fresh, will provide themselves with a continuous succession
of new teachers, as the whim takes them, turning a deaf ear to the
truth bestowing their attention on fables instead" (cf. II Timothy 4:3
f.).

Far be it from Us by this admonition to turn away from a deeper study
and dissemination of sacred doctrine those men, of whatsoever class or
group, who are inspired to it by such a noble zeal.

With daily increasing diligence, Venerable Brothers. as both the duty
and the privilege of your office demand of you, devote yourselves to
searching and penetrating more and more into the sublimate and
profundity of supernatural truth, whose exponents you are by right, and
with eloquence inflamed by zeal make known the holy truths of religion
to those who at the present time, not without the threat of extremely
grave dangers, are being engulfed by the darkness of error in matters
of both mind and heart. And thus through salutary penance and rectitude
of affection men may at last return to God, "to turn away from Whom is
to fall, to turn towards Whom is to rise again; to remain in Whom is to
stand firm; . . . to return to Whom is to come to life again; to dwell
in Whom is to live" (Saint Aug. Soliloquiorum, lib. I. 3, Migne PL 32,
col. 870).

In order that you may accomplish this, We call down heaven's help upon
you; and that it may be poured out in abundance, with great affection
We impart to you and to your flocks the Apostolic Blessing.

Delivered by Pope Pius XII to the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops
who came to Rome for the canonization of Saint Pius X. The Allocution
was read at a special audience granted on 31 May 1954.

