____________________

[8]Pope Pius V - Consueverunt Romani - On Praying the Rosary, 17 September
1569

1. The Roman Pontiffs, and the other Holy Fathers,
our predecessors, when they were pressed in upon by temporal or
spiritual wars, or troubled by other trials, in order that they might
more easily escape from these, and having achieved tranquillity, might
quietly and fervently be free to devote themselves to God, were wont to
implore the divine assistance, through supplications or Litanies to
call forth the support of the saints, and with David to lift up their
eyes unto the Mountains, trusting with firm hope that thence would they
receive aid.

Prompted by their example, and, as is piously believed, by the Holy
Ghost, the inspired [10]Blessed [11]founder of the [12]Order of Friars
Preachers, (whose institutes and rule we ourselves expressly professed
when we were in minor orders), in circumstances similar to those in
which we now find ourselves, when parts of [13]France and of [14]Italy
were unhappily troubled by the heresy of the Albegenses, which blinded
so many of the worldly that they were raging most savagely against the
priests of the Lord and the clergy, raised his eyes up unto heaven,
unto that mountain of the Glorious Virgin Mary, loving Mother of God.
For she by her seed has crushed the head of the twisted serpent, and
has alone destroyed all heresies, and by the blessed fruit of her womb
has saved a world condemned by the fall of our first parent. From her,
without human hand, was that stone cut, which, struck by wood, poured
forth the abundantly flowing waters of graces. And so Dominic looked to
that simple way of praying and beseeching God, accessible to all and
wholly pious, which is called the Rosary, or Psalter of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, in which the same most Blessed Virgin is venerated by the
angelic greeting repeated one hundred and fifty times, that is,
according to the number of the Davidic Psalter, and by the Lord's
Prayer with each decade. Interposed with these prayers are certain
meditations showing forth the entire life of Our Lord Jesus Christ,
thus completing the method of prayer devised by the by the Fathers of
the Holy Roman Church. This same method [15]Saint [16]Dominic
propagated, and it was, spread by the Friars of Blessed Dominic,
namely, of the aforementioned [17]Order, and accepted by not a few of
the people. Christ's faithful, inflamed by these prayers, began
immediately to be changed into new men. The darkness of heresy began to
be dispelled, and the light of the Catholic Faith to be revealed.
Sodalities for this form of prayer began to be instituted in many
places by the Friars of the same Order, legitimately deputed to this
work by their Superiors, and confreres began to be enrolled together.

2. Following the example of our predecessors, seeing that the Church
militant, which God has placed in our hands, in these our times is
tossed this way and that by so many heresies, and is grievously
troubled and afflicted by so many wars, and by the deprave morals of
men, we also raise our eyes, weeping but full of hope, unto that same
mountain, whence every aid comes forth, and we encourage and admonish
each member of Christ's faithful to do likewise in the Lord.

(Pius goes on to confirm the indults, indulgences, etc., which his
predecessors had granted to those who pray the Rosary, and to
explicitate several of these indulgences.)

Given at Rome at Saint Peter's, under the Fisherman's ring, [18]17
September [19]1569, in the fourth year of our Pontificate.

