____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 10 March 2010 - Saint Bonaventure
of Bagnoregio, part 2

1. Saint Bonaventure of Bagnoregio

Last week I spoke of the life and
personality of Saint Bonaventure of Bagnoregio. This morning I would
like to continue my presentation, reflecting on part of his literary
opus and on his doctrine.

As I have already said, among Saint Bonaventure's various merits was
the ability to interpret authentically and faithfully Saint Francis of
Assisi, whom he venerated and studied with deep love. In a special way,
in Saint Bonaventure's day a trend among the Friars Minor known as the
"Spirituals" held that Saint Francis had ushered in a totally new phase
in history and that the "eternal Gospel", of which Revelation speaks,
had come to replace the New Testament. This group declared that the
Church had now fulfilled her role in history. They said that she had
been replaced by a charismatic community of free men guided from within
by the Spirit, namely the "Spiritual Franciscans". This group's ideas
were based on the writings of a Cistercian Abbot, Joachim of Fiore, who
died in 1202. In his works he affirmed a Trinitarian rhythm in history.
He considered the Old Testament as the age of the Fathers, followed by
the time of the Son, the time of the Church. The third age was to be
awaited, that of the Holy Spirit. The whole of history was thus
interpreted as a history of progress: from the severity of the Old
Testament to the relative freedom of the time of the Son, in the
Church, to the full freedom of the Sons of God in the period of the
Holy Spirit. This, finally, was also to be the period of peace among
mankind, of the reconciliation of peoples and of religions. Joachim of
Fiore had awakened the hope that the new age would stem from a new form
of monasticism. Thus it is understandable that a group of Franciscans
might have thought it recognized Saint Francis of Assisi as the
initiator of the new epoch and his Order as the community of the new
period the community of the Age of the Holy Spirit that left behind the
hierarchical Church in order to begin the new Church of the Spirit, no
longer linked to the old structures.

Hence they ran the risk of very seriously misunderstanding Saint
Francis' message, of his humble fidelity to the Gospel and to the
Church. This error entailed an erroneous vision of Christianity as a
whole.

Saint Bonaventure, who became Minister General of the Franciscan Order
in 1257, had to confront grave tension in his Order precisely because
of those who supported the above-mentioned trend of the "Franciscan
Spirituals" who followed Joachim of Fiore. To respond to this group and
to restore unity to the Order, Saint Bonaventure painstakingly studied
the authentic writings of Joachim of Fiore, as well as those attributed
to him and, bearing in mind the need to present the figure and message
of his beloved Saint Francis correctly, he wanted to set down a correct
view of the theology of history. Saint Bonaventure actually tackled the
problem in his last work, a collection of conferences for the monks of
the studium in Paris. He did not complete it and it has come down to us
through the transcriptions of those who heard him. It is entitled
HexaÃ«meron, in other words an allegorical explanation of the six days
of the Creation. The Fathers of the Church considered the six or seven
days of the Creation narrative as a prophecy of the history of the
world, of humanity. For them, the seven days represented seven periods
of history, later also interpreted as seven millennia. With Christ we
should have entered the last, that is, the sixth period of history that
was to be followed by the great sabbath of God. Saint Bonaventure
hypothesizes this historical interpretation of the account of the days
of the Creation, but in a very free and innovative way. To his mind two
phenomena of his time required a new interpretation of the course of
history.

The first: the figure of Saint Francis, the man totally united with
Christ even to communion with the stigmata, almost an alter Christus,
and, with Saint Francis, the new community he created, different from
the monasticism known until then. This phenomenon called for a new
interpretation, as an innovation of God which appeared at that moment.

The second: the position of Joachim of Fiore who announced a new
monasticism and a totally new period of history, going beyond the
revelation of the New Testament, demanded a response. As Minister
General of the Franciscan Order, Saint Bonaventure had immediately
realized that with the spiritualistic conception inspired by Joachim of
Fiore, the Order would become ungovernable and logically move towards
anarchy. In his opinion this had two consequences:

The first, the practical need for structures and for insertion into the
reality of the hierarchical Church, of the real Church, required a
theological foundation. This was partly because the others, those who
followed the spiritualist concept, upheld what seemed to have a
theological foundation.

The second, while taking into account the necessary realism, made it
essential not to lose the newness of the figure of Saint Francis.

How did Saint Bonaventure respond to the practical and theoretical
needs? Here I can only provide a very basic summary of his answer and
it is in certain aspects incomplete:

1. Saint Bonaventure rejected the idea of the Trinitarian rhythm of
history. God is one for all history and is not tritheistic. Hence
history is one, even if it is a journey and, according to Saint
Bonaventure, a journey of progress.

2. Jesus Christ is God's last word in him God said all, giving and
expressing himself. More than himself, God cannot express or give. The
Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Father and of the Son. Christ himself
says of the Holy Spirit: "He will bring to your remembrance all that I
have said to you" (Jn 14: 26), and "he will take what is mine and
declare it to you" (Jn 16: 15). Thus there is no loftier Gospel, there
is no other Church to await. Therefore the Order of Saint Francis too
must fit into this Church, into her faith and into her hierarchical
order.

3. This does not mean that the Church is stationary, fixed in the past,
or that there can be no newness within her. "Opera Christi non
deficiunt, sed proficiunt": Christ's works do not go backwards, they do
not fail but progress, the Saint said in his letter De Tribus
Quaestionibus. Thus Saint Bonaventure explicitly formulates the idea of
progress and this is an innovation in comparison with the Fathers of
the Church and the majority of his contemporaries. For Saint
Bonaventure Christ was no longer the end of history, as he was for the
Fathers of the Church, but rather its centre; history does not end with
Christ but begins a new period. The following is another consequence:
until that moment the idea that the Fathers of the Church were the
absolute summit of theology predominated, all successive generations
could only be their disciples. Saint Bonaventure also recognized the
Fathers as teachers for ever, but the phenomenon of Saint Francis
assured him that the riches of Christ's word are inexhaustible and that
new light could also appear to the new generations. The oneness of
Christ also guarantees newness and renewal in all the periods of
history.

The Franciscan Order of course as he emphasized belongs to the Church
of Jesus Christ, to the apostolic Church, and cannot be built on
utopian spiritualism. Yet, at the same time, the newness of this Order
in comparison with classical monasticism was valid and Saint
Bonaventure as I said in my previous Catechesis defended this newness
against the attacks of the secular clergy of Paris: the Franciscans
have no fixed monastery, they may go everywhere to proclaim the Gospel.
It was precisely the break with stability, the characteristic of
monasticism, for the sake of a new flexibility that restored to the
Church her missionary dynamism.

At this point it might be useful to say that today too there are views
that see the entire history of the Church in the second millennium as a
gradual decline. Some see this decline as having already begun
immediately after the New Testament. In fact, "Opera Christi non
deficiunt, sed proficiunt": Christ's works do not go backwards but
forwards. What would the Church be without the new spirituality of the
Cistercians, the Franciscans and the Dominicans, the spirituality of
Saint Teresa of Avila and Saint John of the Cross and so forth? This
affirmation applies today too: "Opera Christi non deficiunt, sed
proficiunt", they move forward. Saint Bonaventure teaches us the need
for overall, even strict discernment, sober realism and openness to the
newness, which Christ gives his Church through the Holy Spirit. And
while this idea of decline is repeated, another idea, this
"spiritualistic utopianism" is also reiterated. Indeed, we know that
after the Second Vatican Council some were convinced that everything
was new, that there was a different Church, that the pre-Conciliar
Church was finished and that we had another, totally "other" Church an
anarchic utopianism! And thanks be to God the wise helmsmen of the
Barque of Saint Peter, Pope Paul VI and Pope John Paul II, on the one
hand defended the newness of the Council, and on the other, defended
the oneness and continuity of the Church, which is always a Church of
sinners and always a place of grace.

4. In this regard, Saint Bonaventure, as Minister General of the
Franciscans, took a line of government which showed clearly that the
new Order could not, as a community, live at the same "eschatological
height" as Saint Francis, in whom he saw the future world anticipated,
but guided at the same time by healthy realism and by spiritual courage
he had to come as close as possible to the maximum realization of the
Sermon on the Mount, which for Saint Francis was the rule, but
nevertheless bearing in mind the limitations of the human being who is
marked by original sin.

Thus we see that for Saint Bonaventure governing was not merely action
but above all was thinking and praying. At the root of his government
we always find prayer and thought; all his decisions are the result of
reflection, of thought illumined by prayer. His intimate contact with
Christ always accompanied his work as Minister General and therefore he
composed a series of theological and mystical writings that express the
soul of his government. They also manifest his intention of guiding the
Order inwardly, that is, of governing not only by means of commands and
structures, but by guiding and illuminating souls, orienting them to
Christ.

I would like to mention only one of these writings, which are the soul
of his government and point out the way to follow, both for the
individual and for the community: the Itinerarium mentis in Deum, [The
Mind's Road to God], which is a "manual" for mystical contemplation.
This book was conceived in a deeply spiritual place: Mount La Verna,
where Saint Francis had received the stigmata. In the introduction the
author describes the circumstances that gave rise to this writing:
"While I meditated on the possible ascent of the mind to God, amongst
other things there occurred that miracle which happened in the same
place to the blessed Francis himself, namely the vision of the winged
Seraph in the form of a Crucifix. While meditating upon this vision, I
immediately saw that it offered me the ecstatic contemplation of Fr
Francis himself as well as the way that leads to it" (cf. The Mind's
Road to God, Prologue, 2, in Opere di San Bonaventura. Opuscoli
Teologici / 1, Rome 1993, p. 499).

The six wings of the Seraph thus became the symbol of the six stages
that lead man progressively from the knowledge of God, through the
observation of the world and creatures and through the exploration of
the soul itself with its faculties, to the satisfying union with the
Trinity through Christ, in imitation of Saint Francis of Assisi. The
last words of Saint Bonaventure's Itinerarium, which respond to the
question of how it is possible to reach this mystical communion with
God, should be made to sink to the depths of the heart: "If you should
wish to know how these things come about, (the mystical communion with
God) question grace, not instruction; desire, not intellect; the cry of
prayer, not pursuit of study; the spouse, not the teacher; God, not
man; darkness, not clarity; not light, but the fire that inflames all
and transports to God with fullest unction and burning affection....
Let us then... pass over into darkness; let us impose silence on cares,
concupiscence, and phantasms; let us pass over with the Crucified
Christ from this world to the Father, so that when the Father is shown
to us we may say with Philip, "It is enough for me'" (cf. ibid., VII
6).

Dear friends, let us accept the invitation addressed to us by Saint
Bonaventure, the Seraphic Doctor, and learn at the school of the divine
Teacher: let us listen to his word of life and truth that resonates in
the depths of our soul. Let us purify our thoughts and actions so that
he may dwell within us and that we may understand his divine voice
which draws us towards true happiness.

