____________________

[8]Pope John Paul II - Divini Amoris Scientia

[9]Pope Saint John Paul II 1. THE SCIENCE OF DIVINE LOVE, which the
Father of mercies pours out through Jesus Christ in the Holy Spirit, is
a gift granted to the little and the humble so that they may know and
proclaim the secrets of the kingdom, hidden from the learned and the
wise; for this reason Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, praising the
Father who graciously willed it so (cf. Lk 10:21-22; Mt 11:25-26).
Mother Church also rejoices in noting that throughout history the Lord
has continued to reveal himself to the little and the humble, enabling
his chosen ones, through the Spirit who "searches everything, even the
depths of God" (1 Cor 2:10), to speak of the gifts "bestowed on us by
God... in words not taught by human wisdom but taught by the Spirit,
interpreting spiritual truths in spiritual language" (1 Corinthians
2:12,13). In this way the Holy Spirit guides the Church into the whole
truth, endowing her with various gifts, adorning her with his fruits,
rejuvenating her with the power of the Gospel and enabling her to
discern the signs of the times in order to respond ever more fully to
the will of God (cf. Lumen gentium, nn. 4, 12; Gaudium et spes, n. 4).
Shining brightly among the little ones to whom the secrets of the
kingdom were revealed in a most special way is Thérèse of the Child
Jesus and the Holy Face, a professed nun of the [10]Order of Discalced
Carmelites, the 100th anniversary of whose entry into the heavenly
homeland occurs this year. During her life Thérèse discovered "new
lights, hidden and mysterious meanings" (Ms A, 83v·) and received from
the divine Teacher that "science of love" which she then expressed with
particular originality in her writings (cf. Ms B, 1r·). This science is
the luminous expression of her knowledge of the mystery of the kingdom
and of her personal experience of grace. It can be considered a special
charism of Gospel wisdom which Thérèse, like other saints and teachers
of faith, attained in prayer (cf. Ms C, 36r·).

2. The reception given to the example of her life and Gospel teaching
in our century was quick, universal and constant. As if in imitation of
her precocious spiritual maturity, her holiness was recognized by the
Church in the space of a few years. In fact, on 10 June 1914 Pius X
signed the decree introducing her cause of [11]beatification; on 14
August 1921 Benedict XV declared the heroic virtues of the Servant of
God, giving an address for the occasion on the way of spiritual
childhood; and Pius XI proclaimed her blessed on 29 April 1923. Shortly
afterwards, on [12]17 May [13]1925, the same [14]Pope canonized her
before an immense crowd in Saint Peter's Basilica, highlighting the
splendour of her virtues and the originality of her doctrine. Two years
later, on 14 December 1927, in response to the petition of many
missionary Bishops, he proclaimed her patron of the missions along with
Saint Francis Xavier. Beginning with these acts of recognition, the
spiritual radiance of Thérèse of the Child Jesus increased in the
Church and spread throughout the world. Many institutes of consecrated
life and ecclesial movements, especially in the young Churches, chose
her as their patron and teacher, taking their inspiration from her
spiritual doctrine. Her message, often summarized in the so-called
"little way", which is nothing other that the Gospel way of holiness
for all, was studied by theologians and experts in spirituality.
[15]Cathedrals, [16]basilicas, shrines and churches throughout the
world were built and dedicated to the Lord under the patronage of the
Saint of Lisieux. The Catholic Church venerates her in the various
Eastern and Western rites. Many of the faithful have been able to
experience the power of her intercession. Many of those called to the
priestly ministry or the consecrated life, especially in the missions
and the cloister, attribute the divine grace of their vocation to her
intercession and example.

3. The Pastors of the Church, beginning with my predecessors, the
Supreme Pontiffs of this century, who held up her holiness as an
example for all, also stressed that Thérèse is a teacher of the
spiritual life with a doctrine both spiritual and profound, which she
drew from the Gospel sources under the guidance of the divine Teacher
and then imparted to her brothers and sisters in the Church with the
greatest effectiveness (cf. Ms B, 2v·-3·). This spiritual doctrine has
been passed on to us primarily by her autobiography which, taken from
three manuscripts she wrote in the last years of her life and published
a year after her death with the title Histoire d'une âme (Lisieux
1898), has aroused an extraordinary interest down to our day. This
autobiography, translated along with her other writings into about 50
languages, has made Thérèse known in every part of the world, even
outside the Catholic Church. A century after her death, Thérèse of the
Child Jesus continues to be recognized as one of the great masters of
the spiritual life in our time.

4. It is not surprising then that the Apostolic See received many
petitions to confer on her the title of Doctor of the Universal Church.
In recent years, especially with the happy occasion of the first
centenary of her death close at hand, these requests became more and
more numerous, including on the part of Episcopal Conferences; in
addition, study conferences were held and numerous publications have
pointed out how Thérèse of the Child Jesus possesses an extraordinary
wisdom and with her doctrine helps so many men and women of every state
in life to know and love Jesus Christ and his Gospel. In the light of
these facts, I decided carefully to study whether the Saint of Lisieux
had the prerequisites for being awarded the title of Doctor of the
Universal Church.

5. In this context I am pleased to recall briefly some events in the
life of Thérèse of the Child Jesus. Born in Alençon, France, on 2
January 1873, she is baptized two days later in the Church of
NotreDame, receiving the name Marie-Françoise-Thérèse. Her parents are
Louis Martin and Zélie Guérin, whose heroic virtues I recently
recognized. After her mother's death on 28 August 1877, Thérèse moves
with her whole family to the town of Lisieux where, surrounded by the
affection of her father and sisters, she receives a formation both
demanding and full of tenderness. Towards the end of 1879 she receives
the sacrament of Penance for the first time. On the day of Pentecost in
1883 she has the extraordinary grace of being healed from a serious
illness through the intercession of [17]Our Lady of Victories. Educated
by the [18]Benedictines of Lisieux, she receives First Communion on 8
May 1884, after an intense preparation crowned with an exceptional
experience of the grace of intimate union with Jesus. A few weeks
later, on 14 June of that same year, she receives the sacrament of
Confirmation with a vivid awareness of what the gift of the Holy Spirit
involves in her personal sharing in the grace of PentecoSaint On
Christmas Day of 1886 she has a profound spiritual experience that she
describes as a "complete conversion". As a result, she overcomes the
emotional weakness caused by the loss of her mother and begins "to run
as a giant" on the way of perfection (cf. Ms A, 44v·45v·). Thérèse
wishes to embrace the contemplative life, like her sisters Pauline and
Marie in the Carmel of Lisieux, but is prevented from doing so by her
young age. During a pilgrimage to Italy, after visiting the [19]Holy
House of Loreto and places in the Eternal City, at an audience granted
by the Pope to the faithful of the Diocese of Lisieux on 20 November
1887, she asks [20]Leo XIII with filial boldness to be able to enter
Carmel at the age of 15 years. On 9 April 1888 she enters the Carmel of
Lisieux, where she receives the habit of the Blessed Virgin's order on
10 January of the following year and makes her religious profession on
8 September 1890, the feast of the Birth of the Virgin Mary. At Carmel
she undertakes the way of perfection marked out by the Mother
Foundress, Teresa of Jesus, with genuine fervour and fidelity in
fulfilling the various community tasks entrusted to her. Illumined by
the Word of God, particularly tried by the illness of her beloved
father, Louis Martin, who dies on 29 July 1894, Thérèse embarks on the
way of holiness, insisting on the centrality of love. She discovers and
imparts to the novices entrusted to her care the little way of
spiritual childhood, by which she enters more and more deeply into the
mystery of the Church and, drawn by the love of Christ, feels growing
within her the apostolic and missionary vocation which spurs her to
bring everyone with her to meet the divine Spouse. On 9 June 1895, the
feast of the Most Holy Trinity, she offers herself as a sacrificial
victim to the merciful Love of God. On 3 April of the following year,
on the night between Holy Thursday and Good Friday, she notices the
first symptoms of the illness which will lead to her death. Thérèse
welcomes it as a mysterious visitation of the divine Spouse. At the
same time she undergoes a trial of faith which will last until her
death. As her health deteriorates, she is moved to the infirmary on 8
July 1897. Her sisters and other religious collect her sayings, while
her sufferings and trials, borne with patience, intensify to the moment
of her death on the afternoon of 30 September 1897. "I am not dying; I
am entering life", she had written to one of her spiritual brothers, Fr
Bellière (Letters 244). Her last words, "My God, I love you", are the
seal of her life.

6. Thérèse of the Child Jesus left us writings that deservedly qualify
her as a teacher of the spiritual life. Her principal work remains the
account of her life in three autobiographical manuscripts (Manuscrits
autobiographiques A, B, C), first published with the soon to be famous
title of Histoire d'une Âme. In Manuscript A, written at the request of
her sister Agnes of Jesus, then [21]Prioress of the monastery, and
given to her on 21 January 1896, Thérèse describes the stages of her
religious experience: the early years of childhood, especially the time
of her First Communion and Confirmation, adolescence, up to her
entrance into Carmel and her first profession. Manuscript B, written
during her retreat that same year at the request of her sister Marie of
the Sacred Heart, contains some of the most beautiful, best known and
oft-quoted passages from the Saint of Lisieux. They reveal the Saint's
full maturity as she speaks of her vocation in the Church, the Bride of
Christ and Mother of souls. Manuscript C, composed in June and the
first days of July 1897, a few months before her death and dedicated to
the [22]Prioress, Marie de Gonzague, who had requested it, completes
the recollections in Manuscript A on life in Carmel. These pages reveal
the author's supernatural wisdom. Thérèse recounts some sublime
experiences during this final period of her life. She devotes moving
pages to her trial of faith: a grace of purification that immerses her
in a long and painful dark night, illuminated by her trust in the
merciful, fatherly love of God. Once again, and without repeating
herself, Thérèse makes the light of the Gospel shine brightly. Here we
find the most beautiful pages she devoted to trusting abandonment into
God's hands, to unity between love of God and love of neighbor, to her
missionary vocation in the Church. In these three different
manuscripts, which converge in a thematic unity and in a progressive
description of her life and spiritual way, Thérèse has left us an
original autobiography which is the story of her soul. It shows how in
her life God has offered the world a precise message, indicating an
evangelical way, the "little way", which everyone can take, because
everyone is called to holiness. In the 266 Letters we possess,
addressed to family members, women religious and missionary "brothers",
Thérèse shares her wisdom, developing a teaching that is actually a
profound exercise in the spiritual direction of souls. Her writings
also include 54 Poems, some of which have great theological and
spiritual depth inspired by Sacred Scripture. Worthy of special mention
are Vivre d'Amour!... (Poésies 17) and Pourquoi je t'aime, ô Marie!
(Poésies 54), an original synthesis of the Virgin Mary's journey
according to the Gospel. To this literary production should be added
eight Récréations pieuses: poetic and theatrical compositions,
conceived and performed by the Saint for her community on certain feast
days, in accordance with the tradition of Carmel. Among those writings
should be mentioned a series of 21 Prayers.Nor can we forget the
collection of all she said during the last months of her life. These
sayings, of which there are several editions, known as the Novissima
verba, have also been given the title Derniers Entretiens.

7. From careful study of the writings of Saint Thérèse of the Child
Jesus and from the resonance they have had in the Church, salient
aspects can be noted of her "eminent doctrine", which is the
fundamental element for conferring the title of [23]Doctor of the
Church. First of all, we find a special charism of wisdom. This young
Carmelite, without any particular theological training, but illumined
by the light of the Gospel, feels she is being taught by the divine
Teacher who, as she says, is "the Doctor of Doctors" (Ms A, 83v·), and
from him she receives "divine teachings" (Ms B, 1r·). She feels that
the words of Scripture are fulfilled in her: "Whoever is a little one,
let him come to me.... For to him that is little, mercy shall be shown"
(Ms B, 1v·; cf. Prv 9:4; Wis 6:6) and she knows she is being instructed
in the science of love, hidden from the wise and prudent, which the
divine Teacher deigned to reveal to her, as to babes (Ms A, 49r·; cf.
Lk 10:21-22). Pius XI, who considered Thérèse of Lisieux the "Star of
his pontificate", did not hesitate to assert in his homily on the day
of her canonization, [24]17 May [25]1925: "The Spirit of truth opened
and made known to her what he usually hides from the wise and prudent
and reveals to little ones; thus she enjoyed such knowledge of the
things above - as Our immediate Predecessor attests - that she shows
everyone else the sure way of salvation" (AAS 17 [1925], p. 213). Her
teaching not only conforms to Scripture and the Catholic faith, but
excels ("eminet") for the depth and wise synthesis it achieved. Her
doctrine is at once a confession of the Church's faith, an experience
of the Christian mystery and a way to holiness. Thérèse offers a mature
synthesis of Christian spirituality: she combines theology and the
spiritual life; she expresses herself with strength and authority, with
a great ability to persuade and communicate, as is shown by the
reception and dissemination of her message among the People of God.
Thérèse's teaching expresses with coherence and harmonious unity the
dogmas of the Christian faith as a doctrine of truth and an experience
of life. In this regard it should not be forgotten that the
understanding of the deposit of faith transmitted by the Apostles, as
the Second Vatican Council teaches, makes progress in the Church with
the help of the Holy Spirit: "There is growth in insight into the
realities and words that are passed on... through the contemplation and
study of believers who ponder these things in their hearts (cf. Lk 2:19
and 51). It comes from the intimate sense of spiritual realities which
they experience. And it comes from the preaching of those who have
received, along with their right of succession in the episcopate, the
sure charism of truth" (Dei Verbum, n. 8). In the writings of Thérèse
of Lisieux we do not find perhaps, as in other Doctors, a scholarly
presentation of the things of God, but we can discern an enlightened
witness of faith which, while accepting with trusting love God's
merciful condescension and salvation in Christ, reveals the mystery and
holiness of the Church. Thus we can rightly recognize in the Saint of
Lisieux the charism of a [26]Doctor of the Church, because of the gift
of the Holy Spirit she received for living and expressing her
experience of faith, and because of her particular understanding of the
mystery of ChriSaint In her are found the gifts of the new law, that
is, the grace of the Holy Spirit, who manifests himself in living faith
working through charity (cf. Saint Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theol., I-II,
q. 106, art. 1; q. 108, art. 1). We can apply to Thérèse of Lisieux
what my Predecessor Paul VI said of another young Saint and [27]Doctor
of the Church, Catherine of Siena: "What strikes us most about the
Saint is her infused wisdom, that is to say, her lucid, profound and
inebriating absorption of the divine truths and mysteries of faith....
That assimilation was certainly favored by the most singular natural
gifts, but it was also evidently something prodigious, due to a charism
of wisdom from the Holy Spirit" (AAS 62 [1970], p. 675).

8. With her distinctive doctrine and unmistakable style, Thérèse
appears as an authentic teacher of faith and the Christian life. In her
writings, as in the sayings of the Holy Fathers, is found that
lifegiving presence of Catholic tradition whose riches, as the Second
Vatican Council again says, "are poured out in the practice and life of
the Church, in her belief and prayer" (Dei Verbum, n. 8). If considered
in its literary genre, corresponding to her education and culture, and
if evaluated according to the particular circumstances of her era, the
doctrine of Thérèse of Lisieux appears in providential harmony with the
Church's most authentic tradition, both for its confession of the
Catholic faith and for its promotion of the most genuine spiritual
life, presented to all the faithful in a living, accessible language.
She has made the Gospel shine appealingly in our time; she had the
mission of making the Church, the Mystical Body of Christ, known and
loved; she helped to heal souls of the rigors and fears of Jansenism,
which tended to stress God's justice rather than his divine mercy. In
God's mercy she contemplated and adored all the divine perfections,
because "even his justice (and perhaps even more so than the other
perfections) seems to me clothed in love" (Ms A, 83v·). Thus she became
a living icon of that God who, according to the Church's prayer, "shows
his almighty power in his mercy and forgiveness" (cf. Roman Missal,
Opening prayer, 26th Sunday in Ordinary Time). Even though Thérèse does
not have a true and proper doctrinal corpus, nevertheless a particular
radiance of doctrine shines forth from her writings which, as if by a
charism of the Holy Spirit, grasp the very heart of the message of
Revelation in a fresh and original vision, presenting a teaching of
eminent quality. The core of her message is actually the mystery itself
of God-Love, of the Triune God, infinitely perfect in himself. If
genuine Christian spiritual experience should conform to the revealed
truths in which God communicates himself and the mystery of his will
(cf. Dei Verbum, n. 2), it must be said that Thérèse experienced divine
revelation, going so far as to contemplate the fundamental truths of
our faith united in the mystery of Trinitarian life. At the summit, as
the source and goal, is the merciful love of the three Divine Persons,
as she expresses it, especially in her Act of Oblation to Merciful
Love. At the root, on the subject's part, is the experience of being
the Father's adoptive children in Jesus; this is the most authentic
meaning of spiritual childhood, that is, the experience of divine
filiation, under the movement of the Holy Spirit. At the root again,
and standing before us, is our neighbor, others, for whose salvation we
must collaborate with and in Jesus, with the same merciful love as his.
Through spiritual childhood one experiences that everything comes from
God, returns to him and abides in him, for the salvation of all, in a
mystery of merciful love. Such is the doctrinal message taught and
lived by this Saint. As it was for the Church's Saints in every age, so
also for her, in her spiritual experience Christ is the center and
fullness of Revelation. Thérèse knew Jesus, loved him and made him
loved with the passion of a bride. She penetrated the mysteries of his
infancy, the words of his Gospel, the passion of the suffering Servant
engraved on his holy Face, in the splendor of his glorious life, in his
Eucharistic presence. She sang of all the expressions of Christ's
divine charity, as they are presented in the Gospel (cf. PN 24, Jésus,
mon Bien-Aimé, rappelle-toi!). Thérèse received particular light on the
reality of Christ's Mystical Body, on the variety of its charisms,
gifts of the Holy Spirit, on the eminent power of love, which in a way
is the very heart of the Church, where she found her vocation as a
contemplative and missionary (cf. Ms B, 2r·-3v·). Lastly, among the
most original chapters of her spiritual doctrine we must recall
Thérèse's wise delving into the mystery and journey of the Virgin Mary,
achieving results very close to the doctrine of the Second Vatican
Council in chapter eight of the Constitution Lumen gentium and to what
I myself taught in the Encyclical Letter Redemptoris Mater of 25 March
1987.

9. The primary source of her spiritual experience and her teaching is
the Word of God in the Old and New Testaments. She herself admits it,
particularly stressing her passionate love for the Gospel (cf. Ms A,
83v·). Her writings contain over 1,000 biblical quotations: more than
400 from the Old Testament and over 600 from the New. Despite her
inadequate training and lack of resources for studying and interpreting
the sacred books, Thérèse immersed herself in meditation on the Word of
God with exceptional faith and spontaneity. Under the influence of the
Holy Spirit she attained a profound knowledge of Revelation for herself
and for others. By her loving concentration on Scripture - she even
wanted to learn Hebrew and Greek to understand better the spirit and
letter of the sacred books - she showed the importance of the biblical
sources in the spiritual life, she emphasized the originality and
freshness of the Gospel, she cultivated with moderation the spiritual
exegesis of the Word of God in both the Old and New Testaments. Thus
she discovered hidden treasures, appropriating words and episodes,
sometimes with supernatural boldness, as when, in reading the texts of
Saint Paul (cf. 1 Cor 12-13), she realized her vocation to love (cf. Ms
B, 3r·-3v·). Enlightened by the revealed Word, Thérèse wrote brilliant
pages on the unity between love of God and love of neighbor (cf. Ms C,
11v·-19r·); and she identified with Jesus' prayer at the Last Supper as
the expression of her intercession for the salvation of all (cf. Ms C,
34r·-35r·). Her doctrine, as was said, conforms to the Church's
teaching. From childhood she was taught by her family to participate in
prayer and liturgical worship. In preparation for her first Confession,
first Communion and the sacrament of Confirmation, she gave evidence of
an extraordinary love for the truths of the faith, and she learned the
Catechism almost word for word (cf. Ms A, 37r·-37v·). At the end of her
life she wrote the Apostles' Creed in her own blood, as an expression
of her unreserved attachment to the profession of faith. In addition to
the words of Scripture and the Church's doctrine, Thérèse was nourished
as a youth by the teaching of the Imitation of Christ, which, as she
herself acknowledges, she knew almost by heart (cf. Ms A, 47r·).
Decisive for fulfilling her Carmelite vocation were the spiritual texts
of the Mother Foundress, Teresa of Jesus, especially those explaining
the contemplative and ecclesial meaning of the charism of the Teresian
Carmel (cf. Ms C, 33v·). But in a very special way, Thérèse was
nourished on the mystical doctrine of Saint John of the Cross, who was
her true spiritual master (cf. Ms A, 83r·). It should cause no
surprise, then, if she who had been an outstanding pupil in the school
of these two Saints, later declared Doctors of the Church, should later
become a master of the spiritual life.

10. The spiritual doctrine of Thérèse of Lisieux has helped extend the
kingdom of God. By her example of holiness, of perfect fidelity to
Mother Church, of full communion with the See of Peter, as well as by
the special graces obtained by her for many missionary brothers and
sisters, she has rendered a particular service to the renewed
proclamation and experience of Christ's Gospel and to the extension of
the Catholic faith in every nation on earth. There is no need to dwell
at length on the universality of Thérèse's doctrine and on the broad
reception of her message during the century since her death: it has
been well documented in the studies made in view of conferring on her
the title of [28]Doctor of the Church. A particularly important fact in
this regard is that the Church's Magisterium has not only recognized
Thérèse's holiness, but has also highlighted the wisdom of her
doctrine. Pius X had already said that she was "the greatest saint of
modern times". On joyfully receiving the first Italian edition of the
Story of a Soul, he extolled the fruits that had resulted from
Thérèse's spirituality. Benedict XV, on the occasion of proclaiming the
Servant of God's heroic virtues, explained the way of spiritual
childhood and praised the knowledge of divine realities which God
granted to Thérèse in order to teach others the ways of salvation (cf.
AAS 13 [1921], pp. 449-452). On the occasion of both her
[29]beatification and canonization, Pius XI wished to expound and
recommend the Saint's doctrine, underscoring her special divine
enlightenment (Discorsi di Pio XI, vol. I, Turin 1959, p. 91) and
describing her as a teacher of life (cf. AAS 17 [[30]1925], pp.
211-214). When the Basilica of Lisieux was consecrated in 1954, Pius
XII said, among other things, that Thérèse penetrated to the very heart
of the Gospel with her doctrine (cf. AAS 46 [1954], pp. 404-408).
[31]Cardinal Angelo Roncalli, the future Pope John XXIII, visited
Lisieux several times, especially when he was Nuncio in Paris. On
various occasions during his pontificate he showed his devotion to the
Saint and explained the relationship between the doctrine of the Saint
of Avila and her daughter, Thérèse of Lisieux (Discorsi, Messaggi,
Colloqui, vol. II [1959-1960], pp. 771-772). Many times during the
celebration of the Second Vatican Council, the Fathers recalled her
example and doctrine. On the centenary of her birth, Paul VI addressed
a Letter on 2 January 1973 to the Bishop of Bayeux and Lisieux, in
which he extolled Thérèse's example in the search for God, offered her
as a teacher of prayer and theological virtue of hope, and a model of
communion with the Church, calling the attention of teachers,
educators, pastors and theologians themselves to the study of her
doctrine (cf. AAS 65 [1973], pp. 12-15). I myself on various occasions
have had the joy of recalling the person and doctrine of the Saint,
especially during my unforgettable visit to Lisieux on 2 June 1980,
when I wished to remind everyone: "One can say with conviction about
Thérèse of Lisieux that the Spirit of God allowed her heart to reveal
directly to the people of our time the fundamental mystery, the reality
of the Gospel.... Her `little way' is the way of `holy childhood'.
There is something unique in this way, the genius of Saint Thérèse of
Lisieux. At the same time there is the confirmation and renewal of the
most basic and most universal truth. What truth of the Gospel message
is really more basic and more universal than this: God is our Father
and we are his children?" (Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol.
III/1 [1980], p. 1659). These simple references to an uninterrupted
series of testimonies from the Popes of this century on the holiness
and doctrine of Saint Thérèse of the Child Jesus and to the universal
dissemination of her message clearly express to what extent the Church,
in her pastors and her faithful, has accepted the spiritual doctrine of
this young Saint. A sign of the ecclesial reception of the Saint's
teaching is the appeal to her doctrine in many documents of the
Church's ordinary Magisterium, especially when speaking of the
contemplative and missionary vocation, of trust in the just and
merciful God, of Christian joy and of the call to holiness. Evidence of
this fact is the presence of her doctrine in the recent Catechism of
the Catholic Church (nn. 127, 826, 956, 1011, 2011, 2558). She who so
loved to learn the truths of the faith in the catechism deserved to be
included among the authoritative witnesses of Catholic doctrine.
Thérèse possesses an exceptional universality. Her person, the Gospel
message of the "little way" of trust and spiritual childhood have
received and continue to receive a remarkable welcome, which has
transcended every border. The influence of her message extends first of
all to men and women whose holiness and heroic virtues the Church
herself has recognized, to the Church's pastors, to experts in theology
and spirituality, to priests and seminarians, to men and women
religious, to ecclesial movements and new communities, to men and women
of every condition and every continent. To everyone Thérèse gives her
personal confirmation that the Christian mystery, whose witness and
apostle she became by making herself in prayer "the apostle of the
apostles", as she boldly calls herself (Ms A, 56r·), must be taken
literally, with the greatest possible realism, because it has a value
for every time and place. The power of her message lies in its concrete
explanation of how all Jesus' promises are fulfilled in the believer
who knows how confidently to welcome in his own life the saving
presence of the Redeemer.

11. All these reasons are clear evidence of how timely is the Saint of
Lisieux's doctrine and of the particular impact her message has had on
the men and women of our century. Moreover, some circumstances
contribute to making her designation as a Teacher for the Church of our
time even more significant. First of all, Thérèse is a woman, who in
approaching the Gospel knew how to grasp its hidden wealth with that
practicality and deep resonance of life and wisdom which belong to the
feminine genius. Because of her universality she stands out among the
multitude of holy women who are resplendent for their Gospel wisdom.
Thérèse is also a contemplative. In the hiddenness of her Carmel she
lived the great adventure of Christian experience to the point of
knowing the breadth, length, height and depth of Christ's love (cf. Eph
3:18-19). God did not want his secrets to remain hidden, but enabled
Thérèse to proclaim the secrets of the King (cf. Ms C, 2v·). By her
life Thérèse offers a witness and theological illustration of the
beauty of the contemplative life as the total dedication to Christ,
Spouse of the Church, and as an affirmation of God's primacy over all
things. Hers is a hidden life which possesses a mysterious fruitfulness
for spreading the Gospel and fills the Church and the world with the
sweet odor of Christ (cf. LT 169, 2v·). Lastly, Thérèse of Lisieux is a
young person. She reached the maturity of holiness in the prime of
youth (cf. Ms C, 4r·). As such, she appears as a Teacher of evangelical
life, particularly effective in illumining the paths of young people,
who must be the leaders and witnesses of the Gospel to the new
generations. Thérèse of the Child Jesus is not only the youngest
[32]Doctor of the Church, but is also the closest to us in time, as if
to emphasize the continuity with which the Spirit of the Lord sends his
messengers to the Church, men and women as teachers and witnesses to
the faith. In fact, whatever changes can be noted in the course of
history and despite the repercussions they usually have on the life and
thought of individuals in every age, we must never lose sight of the
continuity which links the Doctors of the Church to each other: in
every historical context they remain witnesses to the unchanging Gospel
and, with the light and strength that come from the Holy Spirit, they
become its messengers, returning to proclaim it in its purity to their
contemporaries. Thérèse is a Teacher for our time, which thirsts for
living and essential words, for heroic and credible acts of witness.
For this reason she is also loved and accepted by brothers and sisters
of other Christian communities and even by non-Christians.

12. This year, when the centenary of the glorious death of Thérèse of
the Child Jesus and the Holy Face is being celebrated, as we prepare to
celebrate the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, after receiving a great
number of authoritative petitions, especially from many Episcopal
Conferences throughout the world, and after accepting the official
petition, or Supplex Libellus, addressed to me on 8 March 1997 by the
Bishop of Bayeux and Lisieux, as well as from the Superior General of
the [33]Discalced Carmelites of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel
and from the Postulator General of the same order, I decided to entrust
the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, which has competence in this
matter, with the special study of the cause for conferring the title of
Doctor on this Saint, "after hearing the opinion of the Congregation
for the Doctrine of the Faith regarding the eminent doctrine" (ApoSaint
ConSaint Pastor Bonus, n. 73). After the necessary documentation had
been collected, the two above-mentioned Congregations addressed the
question in the meetings of their respective consultors: the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith on 5 May 1997, with regard
to the "eminent doctrine", and the Congregation for the Causes of
Saints on 29 May of the same year, to examine the special "Positio". On
the following 17 June, the [34]Cardinals and Bishops who are members of
these Congregations, following a procedure approved by me for this
occasion, met in a plenary interdicasterial session and discussed the
cause, giving a unanimously favorable opinion on granting the title of
Doctor of the Universal Church to Saint Thérèse of the Child Jesus and
the Holy Face. I was personally informed of this opinion by
[35]Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, Prefect of the Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith, and by the Pro-Prefect of the Congregation for
the Causes of Saints, Archbishop Alberto Bovone, titular Archbishop of
Caesarea in Numidia. In view of this, on 24 August last, during the
Angelus prayer in the presence of hundreds of Bishops and before a vast
throng of young people from around the world, gathered in Paris for the
12th World Youth Day, I wanted personally to announce my intention to
proclaim Thérèse of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face a Doctor of the
Universal Church during the celebration of World Mission Sunday in
Rome. Today, 19 October 1997, in Saint Peter's Square, filled with
faithful from every part of the world, and in the presence of a great
many [36]Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops, during the solemn
Eucharistic celebration I proclaimed Thérèse of the Child Jesus and the
Holy Face a Doctor of the Universal Church in these words: Fulfilling
the wishes of many Brothers in the Episcopate and of a great number of
the faithful throughout the world, after consulting the Congregation
for the Causes of Saints and hearing the opinion of the Congregation
for the Doctrine of the Faith regarding her eminent doctrine, with
certain knowledge and after lengthy reflection, with the fullness of
Our apostolic authority We declare Saint Thérèse of the Child Jesus and
the Holy Face, virgin, to be a Doctor of the Universal Church. In the
name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. This having
been duly enacted, We decree that this Apostolic Letter is to be
religiously preserved and to have full effect both now and in the
future; furthermore, it is thus to be judged and defined as right, and
whatever to the contrary may be attempted by anyone, on whatever
authority, knowingly or unknowingly, is null and void. Given in Rome,
at Saint Peter's, under the Fisherman's ring, the 19th day of the month
of October in the year of the Lord 1997, the 20th of the Pontificate.

