____________________

[8]Meditation for the Feast of the Guardian Angels - Pope John XXIII - 2
October 1959

1. Guardian Angel

According to the teaching of the Roman catechism, we must remember
how admirable was the intention of divine Providence in entrusting
to the angels the mission of watching over all mankind, and over
individual human beings, lest they should fall victims to the grave
dangers which they encounter. In this earthly life, when children
have to make their way along a path beset with obstacles and snares,
their fathers take care to call upon the help of those who can look
after them and come to their aid in adversity. In the same way our
Father in heaven has charged his angels to come to our assistance
during our earthly journey which leads us to our blessed fatherland,
so that, protected by the angels' help and care, we may avoid the
snares upon our path, subdue our passions and, under this angelic
guidance, follow always the straight and sure road which leads to
Paradise...

Everyone of us is entrusted to the care of an angel.

That is why we must have a lively and profound devotion to our own
Guardian Angel, and why we should often and trustfully repeat the
dear prayer we were taught in the days of our childhood.

May we never fail in this devotion to the angels! During our earthly
pilgrimage we may often run the risk of having to face the natural
elements in turmoil, or the wrath of men who may seek to do us harm.
But our Guardian Angel is always present. Let us never forget him
and always remember to pray to him.
