____________________

[8]Sollicitudo pastoralis - Fostering and Preserving the Orders of Men
Religious, by Pope Innocent XI, 20 November 1679

1. The
pastoral solicitude of office, by which We preside over the governing
of the catholic Church spread throughout the whole globe by divine
disposition, urges and impels Us to attend to fostering and preserving
the Orders of men religious instituted by this holy See with wise piety
for the glory of the Omnipotent God and the salvation of souls, and
refulgent in the Church of God on account of their great merits in
their holy and primeval regulations, and in keeping them safe and
fortifying them from those things hurtful, which could extinguish and
relax the spirit and rigor of the original conscientiousness, and in
providing for their blessed advancement in the way of the mandates of
the Lord, as much as is conceded Us from on high.

And also since (as We understand them) in the many general chapters of
the Order of Friars Minor of Saint Francis by the name of the
Observance, and recently in that of Vallisoletanus, which was
celebrated in the year 1670, it has been declared and protested by the
unanimous consent of all the friars who were heard, that until now from
none of the precepts of the rule of the Friars Minor (whether they are
called "the Friars Minor of the body of the Observance", or "the
Observants", or "the Reformed", or "the Discalced", or "the
Recollects," have they been dispensed, nor has the body of the
Observance itself ever introduced or admitted any dispensation in the
rule, but rather have they willed according to their strength, favored
as they are by Divine aid, to observe it purely according to the
declarations of the Supreme Pontiffs, admitted and received by the
Friars Observants or of the Observance in their collection of general
statutes, for those of the Cismontane in 1663, and for those of the
Utramontane in 1621, and by the Reformed, Discalced and the Recollects
in their respective particular constitutions:

We, for greater firmness of protestation, and so that in the
aforementioned Order the condition and rule of the Friars Minor be
observed, and that the pretext for transgressing it be taken away from
individual friars, approving and confirming in order the very same
protestation and declaration of these things expressed above, by Our
own decision and from certain knowledge and Our mature deliberation,
and from the plenitude of apostolic power, for the sake of retaining
the present things We declare that all and each friar of the body of
the Observance of the said Order to be bound in conscience to observe
the rule of the Friars Minor of Saint Francis and the precepts set
forth and enumerated by Nicholas III of blessed memory and Clement V,
Our predecessors as Roman Pontiffs according to the norm of the
respective aforesaid constitutions, and significantly, besides the
precepts which do not so frequently occur to be bound even to the
recitation of the Divine Office, to the precept in the rule on fasting,
unless necessity excuses them, to going about without footwear, this is
without anything that might cover the foot, of whatever material it
might be, unless true necessity confirmed by a prelate be present, to
not go horseback riding, unless infirmity or necessity proven by the
judgement of the superiors excuses them, to cheapness in clothing
according to the aforesaid respective constitutions, to not using more
pieces of clothing than those which are prescribed by the rule, namely
one tunic with a capuche and another without a capuche, a cord and
breeches; for any kind of whatever clothing beyond the aforesaid
(excepting the mantle which is licit from the beginning of religious
life), such as undergarments or shirts; sweat bands, little tunics, and
the like, are against the rule, unless true necessity excusing from the
precept and approved by the prelate be present; lastly to be bound to
the capital precept of the religion of the Friars Minor concerning not
receiving money through themselves or through an interposed person, for
the Friars Minor of the body of the Observance can have the use of
other necessary things, but not the dominion [thereof], of money,
however, neither the dominion nor the use; and hence the handling of
whatever coins, or money, which is not purely natural, or which is in
any manner civil [currency], is entirely prohibited to the Friars Minor
Observants or of the Observance; and besides each and every
dispensation, concession and custom, if it is ascertained to be against
the aforesaid things among the body of the Observance of the aforesaid
Order, alike in change, knowledge, deliberation and fullness of power,
for the sake of retaining these present things, We revoke, nullify,
void, and annul, and both in their force and effect We thoroughly and
entirely revoke, and We determine and declare them to be revoked,
nullified, voided, and nothings, both in their force and effect
thoroughly and entirely empty and to be so forever. Equally, however,
declaring those things which are not prohibited by the aforesaid things
in the said Order [concerning] the apostolic syndics, since their use
is not a dispensation from the rule, but a means provided by Our
predecessors the Roman Pontiffs for the purer observance thereof, or
syndics of the same kind chosen according to the constitution
prescribed by Nicholas III and Clement V the aforementioned
predecessors, or according to the disposition of the constitutions
restored by Martin IV and Martin V and Paul IV equally Our
predecessors, just as their use among each family, congregation,
reform, or province of the aforesaid respective Order had been
received.

Likewise so that in entering religion one wills to undertake each
obligation, he be fully informed, we establish that no one is to be
received to the regular habit in the same Order, unless he be fully
informed beforehand concerning the aforesaid precepts of the rule which
oblige in conscience, and that with this previous notification he wills
to undergo probation; nor is anyone to be admitted to regular
profession, unless he be examined beforehand concerning his
understanding of the rule and its precepts according to the aforesaid
things, and then a protestation be made by him before the whole
community, to [the effect] that he is obliged by profession to the
observance of the rule with all its precepts just now enumerated and
expressed, and this protestation be received, and he make profession
under it.

So that the example of the prelates or superiors truly be a more
efficacious means of observing the aforesaid things, We therefore
likewise establish that no one be able to be chosen a prelate or
superior in the aforesaid Order, who does not follow the common life of
observance, that is, he who frequently rides horseback, or has a
sickness, by which he is excused from the obligation of going about on
foot, who uses undergarments or shirts or linens upon himself or on his
bed, who goes about with shoes, who does not observe the fasts of the
Church or of the rule, who has been seen at anytime handling money,
unless he has mended his ways for at least three years now, who notably
is defective in attending the community choir, refectory, and other
places, as is prescribed in his constitutions. I judge that the
election of such a one, who in all the aforementioned things does not
follow the common life, must be nullified by the prelate or general
superior, after having learnt the information in the external forum,
for the sake of his conscience, without the harshness of a sentence,
but with the counsel and assent of three friars, who are or have been
provincials or at least provincial definitors; nevertheless upon the
consciences of these same, lest either one who observes the common life
be expelled, or one who does not observe it be confirmed, We place the
responsibility.

Lastly, so that every occasion of trespassing the precept of not
handling coins or money be born away, We enjoin each and every prelate
or superior of the said Order in virtue of holy obedience, and under
the penalty of the deprivation of their office, to permit no religious
of the same Order to have the administration of lands, of returns, or
of whatever other things, moveable or immovable, to whomsoever the
dominion belong, and significantly that to none of the religious of
this kind of Order be permitted the administration of the temporal
goods of any monastery of women religious under whatever pretext or
name, namely, as administrators, syndics, agents, tenants,
superintendents, steward, or any other imaginable.

Concluding this present letter and whatever things which must be
contained in it, even for [the sake of] that which the superiors and
friars of the aforesaid Order, and whatever others exist, of whatever
status, grade, order, preeminence or dignity, or others worthy of
specific and individual mention and reference, who having or in any
manner alleging to have an interest in the aforementioned things, do
not consent to them, or to those things which have been spoken of,
cited and heard, and to the matter [at hand], on account of which this
present letter has been issued, as if they have not been sufficiently
adduced, verified, and justified, or for whatever other reason, even
however verified, legitimate and privileged a case, appearance, pretext
or point, even those contained in the body of law, even the irregular,
the most irregular and entirely injurious, not at any time vitiated by
subreption or obreption or nullity, or by Our intention or the consent
of those who have interest, or for whatever other purpose, even however
great and substantial and unconsidered and unthinkable, and on account
of lacking individual reference to thus be noted, impugned, infringed,
retracted, modified, refuted, called into controversy, or reduced to
the terms of law or of the statutes or constitutions of the said Order,
or to be understood or accomplished contrary to those things by the
opening of the mouth, by complete restitution, or whatever other remedy
of law, of fact or of favor, or having accomplished, whether anything
in a judicial procedure or outside thereof has even been conceded or
decreed by a [legal] motion, equal in knowledge or plenitude of power,
or even if in any manner one be able to command it himself; but so that
this present letter remain and be forever firm, valid, and efficacious,
and to procure and obtain its own plenary and integral effects, and by
this, to which it pertains and will pertain in whatever time, in all
things and through all things to be observed and fulfilled inviolably
and resolutely, and in such a manner that it is not be judged even
otherwise in the aforementioned things, and thus by whatever judges,
ordinary or delegated, even by the auditors of the causes of the
apostolic palace, or by the [10]cardinals of the Holy Roman Church,
even by legates a latere and by nuncios of the Apostolic See, or by
whatever others who exercise or will exercise whatever preeminence and
power, when it has been brought before them and for the sake of
whosoever by whatever other faculty and authority in judging and
interceding, it be judged and defined to pertain to themselves, and
happen to be tried as void and vain (if such is contrary to this
letter) by whomsoever, of whatever authority, knowingly or unknowingly.

Not withstanding the aforesaid things, and, as much as is needful, Our
rule and that of the apostolic chancery concerning not removing a law
that has already been granted, and concerning other apostolic laws, and
those set forth in universal, and provincial and synodal councils,
general or special, in constitutions or ordination, and besides those
of the said Order, and of its congregations, reforms, provinces and
convents and of whatever other [division], or by others of whatever
kind, even having been sworn, by apostolic confirmation, or of whatever
other firmness of strength, in statutes, usages, compositions and
customs, even immemorial, also by privileges, indults and apostolic
letters to the same Order, and its superiors, friars, and persons
whatsoever, under whatever tenor and form of words, and even with
whatever derogations of this to be derogated, or by other more
efficacious, most efficacious and unusual passages, and by those things
which would void them, and by other decrees in general or in special,
even by a [legal] motion, equal in knowledge and plenitude of power,
and others in consistory and in any way conceded contrary to the
aforementioned things and of however many confirmed, approved, and
renewed vicissitudes; to which each and every, even if for the
sufficient derogation of those things and their tenor, special,
specific, expressed and individual, and word for word, not even by
general indeed important passages, the mention or whatever other
expression used or some other exquisite form that would approach this,
their tenor being of this kind, having respectively the form, case and
occasions to the present letter expressed, most exactly observed and
specified fully and sufficiently, those other things which would
perdure in their strength, to effect the aforesaid things, with this
change alone, We especially and expressly derogate and will to be
derogated and in all other contrary things of whatever kind.

We also will that when there has been a transferal of the present
letter, or its copy, even printed, subscribed to by the hand of any
notary public, and sealed with the seal of a person established in
ecclesiastical dignity, it be held with exactly the same trust in
whatever place as much in court as outside of it, which it should hold
by this very same present document even if they should be exhibited or
shown [in public].

Given at [11]Rome, at Saint Peter's, under the ring of the Fisherman,
on the 20th day of November, 1679, the fourth year of Our Pontificate.

