____________________

[9]Optime Noscitis - On The Proposed Catholic University Of Ireland, by Pope
Pius IX, 20 March 1854

To the Venerable Brothers, the Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland.
Venerable Brothers, Greetings and Apostolic Benediction.

1. You know very well how great Our joy and consolation was when We
first learned that in your devotion, you willingly followed Our advice
and that of the Holy See. In the Synod of Thurles, held in 1850, you
decided, among other things, to establish a Catholic university as soon
as possible. There the youth of your illustrious nation could be shaped
in piety and every virtue and educated in letters and in the more
difficult disciplines free from any danger to their faith. You also
remember clearly how We approved both the acts of that synod and the
establishment of this university in Our apostolic letter published on
March 23, 1852. Then in Our encyclical letter of March 25, 1852, which
We sent to you, We gave thanks regarding this plan for the advancement
of religion and knowledge. We also gave well-deserved praise to those
faithful people who had already contributed substantial aid in support
of that Catholic university in Ireland.

2. As We greatly desired to see this Catholic lyceum or university
founded quickly in Ireland, We recommended in Our apostolic letter to
Paul, who was then [10]Archbishop of Armagh, that the office of
Apostolic Delegate be prolonged. By this office he could see to it that
the decrees of the Synod of Thurles were diligently observed and
especially that the establishment of the Catholic university which that
synod approved and which We confirmed was brought quickly to the
desired result. Therefore, when that venerable brother was transferred
to govern the archiepiscopal church of Dublin, it seemed appropriate to
Us that he should continue in the office of Apostolic Delegate in the
same manner as We set forth in Our apostolic letter of May 3, 1852. We
thought for certain, that you would put your hand to the task without
delay and that you would apply all of your understanding and enthusiasm
toward the speedy founding of this university. We trust that great
benefits will flow from it to the faithful.

3. Thus, it was with great annoyance that We learned that this Catholic
university, which We and all good people desire, has not yet been
founded, although you already have all the necessary materials to build
it. Therefore, we write this letter to you and implore you to put aside
all hesitation and to direct all your thoughts and attention with
redoubled efforts toward its construction. With the goal of
accomplishing this pious and salutary work more quickly, We command all
of you to hold a meeting within a period of three months after you
receive this letter with Paul, the [11]Archbishop of Dublin. We name
him as Apostolic Delegate; he will preside over this meeting. You will
meet there and convene according to the rule of the sacred canons.
After your plans have been discussed again without public celebration
and you are all of one mind, may you arrange everything which pertains
to the quick building and opening of the university.

4. It will be your episcopal concern in this meeting to adopt
appropriate plans so that this university may live up to the sanctity
and dignity of the Catholic name with which it is adorned. Therefore,
see to it that divine religion is regarded as the soul of the entire
institution of learning. For that purpose encourage the fear of God and
His worship so that the sacred trust of faith may be preserved and all
studies may proceed, joined in a close bond with religion. Thus may the
shimmering rays of Catholic doctrine illuminate all kinds of
intellectual pursuits. Decorous language should be firmly maintained so
that whatever is Catholic, whatever proceeds from this See of Saint
Peter, the safe harbor of the whole Catholic communion and the mother
and teacher of all churches, may be welcomed and believed. May whatever
is against it be rejected, so that every error and profane novelty may
be repelled and eliminated. The professors of this university should
show themselves to be models of good works in doctrine, in purity, and
in seriousness. Their primary concern should be shaping the minds of
the youth to piety, decency, and every virtue; instructing them in the
finest matters; and educating them carefully in letters and studies
according to the teachings of the Catholic Church, which is the pillar
and chief support of truth.

5. As We know that you have already chosen Our beloved son, Father John
Henry Newman, to govern that university, We want to approve your choice
that this priest, blessed with such wonderful gifts of mind and soul
and endowed with piety, sound doctrine, and zeal for the Catholic
religion, assume the care and governance of this university and preside
over it as Rector.

6. We certainly do not doubt that in this same meeting, you will take
care to establish by consensus other things which might increase the
glory of God in your dioceses, promote the discipline and sanctity of
the clergy, and foster the piety and devotion of the people. In
addition, you know very well that it is entirely necessary, especially
in these harsh times, for the shepherds of the Church to apply untiring
care, attention, diligence, and effort toward fulfilling every aspect
of the episcopal duty. Therefore do not neglect in that same meeting to
make plans by which you, fulfilling your ministry, may preserve the
purity of our holy faith in those areas, promote worship, and encourage
the proper education and sanctity of the clergy. May these plans enable
you to educate the faithful entrusted to you in the commandments of
holy religion, to strengthen them through the gifts of heavenly graces,
to keep them away from poisoned pastures, and to guide them to good
ones. Lead back to the one fold of Christ the unfortunates who stray
from it. Destroy the snares, the deceptions, and the errors of our
enemies and break their force.

7. Because you are aware of what bountiful fruits holy Missions bring
to the Christian people with the help of heavenly grace, you should not
neglect to form a company of priests, both secular and regular. This
will ensure that you have a ready supply of energetic and industrious
workers who, adorned with every virtue and handling the word of truth
rightly, can exercise the salutary ministry of the holy Missions
beneficially in your dioceses.

8. Now We must stress again with great fervor that you should commit
all your efforts and authority to seeing that everyone devoutly obeys
the decrees of the Synod of Thurles which We approved and confirmed.
They should zealously accomplish all that was ratified in those
decrees. In order to more easily accomplish this, promulgate the
decrees of the Synod of Thurles more solemnly. Command their observance
in both provincial and diocesan synods which, as you know, you should
convene according to the rules of the Council of Trent.

9. Moreover, considering on this serious occasion the circumstances and
affairs in each diocese and province, do not cease to extend your
episcopal fervor so that you may strengthen what is weak, heal what is
sick, bind up what is broken, bring back what is discarded, and seek
what is lost. Thus by the strength which God supplies, may He be
glorified in everything through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Your supreme
desire should be to visit the tombs of the apostles Peter and Paul at
times specified according to the Apostolic Constitutions and to explain
to Us the cares, the condition, and the affairs of your dioceses so
that you might receive help to perform your office with eagerness and
zeal.

10. We are convinced that because of your eminent devotion and singular
piety, love, and obedience toward Us and this Apostolic See, you will
accomplish these desires, warnings, requests, and orders of Ours. These
requests clearly show how concerned We are for the spiritual well-being
and prosperity of your country. Meanwhile, We humbly ask God who is
rich in mercy to be with you at all times in the abundance of His
divine grace. May He bless you and your pastoral cares and works so
that the faithful entrusted to you might daily walk more worthily
before God, pleasing Him in everything and bearing fruit in every good
work. As a pledge of these things and as a sign of Our paternal
affection for you, We lovingly impart Our apostolic blessing to you and
to all the clergy and faithful of your churches.

Given in Rome at Saint Peter's on the 20th day of March in the year
1854, the eighth year of Our pontificate.

