____________________

[8]Address to the General Chapters of Religious Orders and Congregations, by
Pope Paul VI, 23 May 1964

1. Beloved Sons,

We find ourselves filled with a spirit of great joy and no little hope
as we gaze out upon this select gathering -- an assembly of men
burdened, as you are, with the government of such venerable and
distinguished religious families within the Church. We take pleasure in
greeting you here and in giving expression to that extraordinary esteem
and gratitude which We hold in your regard.

You have come here to Rome to conduct the General Chapter for each of
your various Religious Institutes. While these Chapters primarily have
relevance to your own Orders and Congregations, yet they also influence
the life of the Church; for the Church, to a great extent, derives Her
vigor, Her apostolic zeal, and Her fervor in seeking holiness of life,
from the flourishing condition of Her Religious Institutes.

Moreover, you have presented yourselves to Us, not only to offer your
obedience to the Vicar of Christ as devoted and loving sons, but also
to obtain the Apostolic Blessing that it might benefit you yourselves,
your Institutes, and especially those matters that are being treated of
in your Chapters. We have firm confidence that out of these
deliberations and decisions there will come forth beneficial fruits
whereby your religious life will be lived with greater earnestness and
enthusiasm.

Although We would have most willingly granted separate audiences to
each of your Capitular groups, and would have addressed each group in
accordance with its proper character and current needs, yet We
preferred to receive all of you together. By addressing the various
Institutes all at once, We felt that We would thereby give greater
weight to Our words, all the more so since this occasion provides Us
with the opportunity to set forth matters of importance to all
Religious, however many they may be, throughout the world.

In the first place, We wish to note the very great importance of your
Religious Institutes, and to observe that your work is wholly necessary
for the Church in these days. Admittedly, the doctrine of the universal
vocation of all the Faithful to holiness of life (regardless of their
position or social situation) has been advanced very much in modern
times. This is as it should be, for it is based on the fact that all
the Faithful are consecrated to God by their [10]Baptism.

Moreover, the very necessities of the times demand that the fervor of
Christian life should inflame souls and radiate in the world itself. In
other words, the needs of the times demand a consecration of the world
and this task pertains pre-eminently to the laity. All these
developments are unfolding under the counsel of Divine Providence and
that is why We rejoice over such salutary undertakings.

However, we must be on guard lest, for this very reason, the true
notion of religious life as it has traditionally flourished in the
Church, should become obscured. We must beware lest our youth, becoming
confused while thinking about their choice of a state in life, should
be thereby hindered in some way from having a clear and distant vision
of the special function and immutable importance of the religious state
within the Church. Therefore, it has seemed good to Us to recall here
the priceless importance and necessary function of religious life; for
this stable way of life, which receives its proper character from
profession of the evangelical vows, is a perfect way of living
according to the example and teaching of Jesus Christ. It is a state of
life which keeps in view the constant growth of charity leading to its
final perfection. In other ways of life, though legitimate in
themselves, the specific ends, advantages and functions are of a
temporal character.

On the other hand, right now it is of supreme importance for the Church
to bear witness socially and publicly. Such witness is proclaimed by
the way of life embraced by the Religious Institutes. And the more it
is stressed that the role of the laity demands that they live and
advance the Christian life in the world, so much the more is it
necessary for those who have truly renounced the world to let their
example radiantly shine forth. In this way it will be clearly shown
that the kingdom of Christ is not of this world. (Cfr. John 18:36)

Hence it follows that the profession of the evangelical vows is a
super-addition to that consecration which is proper to [11]Baptism.

It is indeed a special consecration which perfects the former one,
inasmuch as by it, the follower of Christ totally commits and dedicates
himself to God, thereby making his entire life a service to God alone.

All these observations are connected with another point which
solicitously, We wish to make with a fatherly heart. It is necessary
that you hold the religious vows in highest esteem and that you attach
the greatest importance to their religious function and practice. Only
in this manner will you be able to lead a life that is becoming and in
harmony with the state you have embraced -- a state that you have
freely chosen and in which, consequently, you now find yourselves
caught up from day to day; only in this way will your state of life
efficaciously aid you to progress toward the perfection of charity;
only in this way will the Faithful thereby receive from you your
witness to the Christian life and be inspired to follow it.

Although human conditions have changed notably in recent years, and
consequently religious life must be accommodated to these changes, yet
those things which follow from the very nature of the evangelical
counsels still retain all their vigor and can in no wise be diminished.

Therefore, it is supremely important to cherish diligently religious
obedience in your lives.

Religious obedience is and must remain a holocaust of one's own will
which is offered to God. A Religious makes this sacrifice of self with
a view to humbly obeying lawful Superiors (whose authority, of course,
should always be exercised within the confines of charity and with due
regard for the human person), even though our times summon Religious to
the performance of many and heavy burdens, and to carrying out these
duties more cheerfully and more promptly.

Do not fail to inculcate a love for poverty, concerning which there is
much discussion going on in the Church today. Religious must surpass
all others by their example of true evangelical poverty. Therefore,
they must love that poverty to which they have spontaneously committed
themselves. It is not enough for Religious to depend merely on the
Superior's decision with regard to their use of material things. Let
the Religious, of their own will, be content with the things that are
needed for properly fulfilling their way of life, shunning those
conveniences and luxuries by which the religious life is devitalized.
Moreover, in addition to that poverty which should characterize the
life of the individual Religious, we must not fail to take into account
that poverty by which the family or whole body of Religious should be
distinguished. Therefore let the Religious Institutes avoid a too
exquisite style and ornamentation in their buildings and in carrying
out their functions, as well as anything else that savors of luxury,
always bearing in mind the social condition of the people among whom
they live. Let them also refrain from excessive concern in gathering
funds; rather let them be preoccupied with using the temporal goods
which Divine Providence has bestowed upon them to minister to the
genuine necessities of needy brethren; whether those in need of
assistance be their fellow countrymen or those who live in other parts
of the world.

With singular care, Religious should preserve chastity as a treasured
gem. Everyone knows that in the present condition of human society the
practice of perfect chastity is made difficult, not only because of the
prevalence of depraved morality but also on account of false teachings
which glamorize excessively the merely natural condition of man,
thereby pouring poison into his soul. An awareness of these facts
should impel Religious to stir up their faith more energetically --
that same faith by which we believe the declarations of Christ when He
proclaims the supernatural value of chastity that is sought for the
sake of the Kingdom of Heaven. It is this same faith which assures us
beyond doubt that, with the help of divine grace, we can preserve
unsullied, the flower of chastity.

To obtain this blessed objective, it is, of course, necessary to
practice Christian mortification with more courageous zeal, and also to
guard the senses with more diligent care. Therefore, the life of the
Religious should find no place for books, periodicals or shows which
are unbecoming or indecent, not even under the pretext of a desire to
learn things useful to know or to broaden one's education, except
possibly the case, duly ascertained by the Religious Superior, where
there is proven necessity for the study of such things. In a world
pervaded by so many sordid forms of vice, no one can adequately reckon
the powerful effectiveness of the sacred ministry of one whose life is
radiant with the light of a chastity consecrated to God and from which
he draws his strength.

So much for these observations. And now We wish to speak very briefly
about something which pertains to the structure and government of the
Religious Institutes. For it is also in such matters that the General
Chapters are currently engaged.

It is quite evident that the proper way of living religious life
requires discipline. There must be laws and suitable conditions for
observing them. Therefore, the principal task of the General Chapter
is, as time goes on, to keep intact those norms of the Religious family
which were set up by its Founder and Lawgiver. Therefore, it is your
responsibility to firmly shut the door against all those modes of
conduct which gradually devitalize the strength of religious
discipline, namely, practices which are dangerous to religious life,
unnecessary dispensations, and privileges not properly approved. You
must likewise be wholly on guard against any relaxation of discipline
which is urged, not by true necessity, but which rather arises from
arrogance of spirit, or aversion to obedience, or love of worldly
things. Moreover, with respect to undertaking new projects or
activities, you should refrain from taking on those which do not
entirely correspond to the principal work of your Institute or to the
mind of your Founder. For Religious Institutes will flourish and
prosper so long as the integral spirit of their Founder continues to
inspire their rule of life and apostolic works, as well as the actions
and lives of their members.

Religious Communities, inasmuch as they resemble living bodies, rightly
desire to experience continual growth. However, this growth of the
Institute must be based firmly on the more diligent observance of your
rules rather than on the number of members or the making of new laws.
Multiplicity of laws is not always accompanied by progress in religious
life. It often happens that the more rules there are, the less people
pay attention to them. Therefore, let the General Chapters always use
their right to make laws moderately and prudently.

The most important work of the General Chapters is the studied
accommodation of the rules of their Institute to the changed conditions
of the times. This, however, must be done in such a way that the proper
nature and discipline of the Institute is kept intact. Every Religious
family has its proper function and it must remain faithful to this
role. The fruitfulness of the Institute's life is based on this
fidelity to its specific purpose, and in this matter an abundance of
heavenly graces will never be lacking. Therefore, no renovation of
discipline is to be introduced which is incompatible with the nature of
the Order or Congregation and which, in any way, departs from the mind
of the Founder. Moreover, this renovation of discipline demands that it
proceed only from competent authority. Therefore, until this
accommodation of discipline is duly processed and brought into juridic
effect, let the Religious members not introduce anything new on their
own initiative, nor relax the restraints of discipline nor give way to
censorious criticism. Let them act in such a way that they might rather
help and more promptly effect this work of renewal by their fidelity
and obedience. If the desired renovation takes place in this way, then
the letter will have changed, but the spirit will have remained the
same, in all its integrity.

In bringing about this renewal of your Institutes, your primary concern
must always be the spiritual life of your members. Wherefore, among
yourselves and among all other Religious whose duty it is to devote
themselves to works of the sacred apostolate, We would be entirely
opposed to see anyone espousing that false opinion which claims that
primary concern must be given to external works and only secondary
attention devoted to the interior life of perfection, as though this
were demanded by the spirit of the times and the needs of the Church.

Zealous activity and the cultivation of one's interior life should not
bring any harm to each other; indeed, they require the closest union,
in order that both may ever proceed with equal pace and progress.
Therefore, let zeal for prayer, the beauty of a pure conscience,
patience in adversities, active and vibrant charity devoted to the
salvation of souls, increase in union with fervent works. When these
virtues are neglected, not only will apostolic labor lack vigor and
fruitfulness, but the spirit also will gradually lose fervor. As a
consequence, the Religious will not be able to avoid, for long, the
dangers which lie hidden in the very performance of the sacred
ministry.

With respect to that portion of the apostolate which is entrusted to
the care of the Religious, We wish to make some further observations.
Religious Institutes should sedulously adapt the work proper to their
apostolates to modern conditions and circumstances. The younger
Religious, particularly, are to be instructed and educated properly in
this matter, in such a way, however, that the apostolic zeal with which
they must be inflamed, does not remain circumscribed exclusively by the
boundaries of one's own Order but rather opens outwardly toward the
great spiritual necessities of our times. Nor is this enough. For while
being educated along the lines We have indicated, they should also
cultivate an exquisite sensitivity to their duties by force of which,
both in words and deeds, they will constantly show themselves as true
ministers of God, distinguished by soundness of doctrine and
recommended to the people by holiness of life. However, in these
matters let not the Religious be left solely to their own initiative,
since their work must always be subject to the vigilance of Superiors,
especially if it is a matter of work that has notable relevance to
civil life.

It is of the greatest concern to Us that the work of the members of
Religious Institutes should go along harmoniously with the norms
established by the Sacred Hierarchy. As a matter of fact, the exemption
of Religious Orders is in no conflict whatsoever with the divinely
given Constitution of the Church, by force of which every priest,
particularly in the performance of the sacred ministry, must obey the
Sacred Hierarchy. For the members of these Religious Institutes are, at
all times and in all places, subject principally to the Roman Pontiff,
as to their highest Superior (Canon 499, par. 1). For this reason, the
Religious Institutes are at the service of the Roman Pontiff in those
works which pertain to the welfare of the universal Church. With regard
to the exercise of the sacred apostolate in various dioceses, Religious
are also under the jurisdiction of Bishops, to whom they are bound to
give assistance, always without prejudice to the nature of their proper
apostolate and the things that are necessary for their religious life.
From all this, it is quite evident how much the allied and auxiliary
ministry of the Religious given to the diocesan clergy conduces to the
good of the Church, when their united forces result in more vigorous
and more effective action.

Now, my dearly beloved sons, from these brief observations, you know
Our mind as to what We consider as greatly contributing to the growth
of religious life in our times. May all these remarks show you with
what solicitude We view and esteem the religious life and what great
hope We put in your helpful work. The road which We pointed out to you
is certainly difficult and laborious. But lift up your soul in hope,
for the cause is not ours but that of Jesus Christ. Christ is our
strength, our hope, our power. He will be with us always. Continue to
diffuse the good odor of Christ as widely as possible by the integrity
of your faith, by the holiness of your life, by your great zeal for all
the virtues. Meanwhile, as We thank you for your obedience, We pray God
through the intercession of the Most Sweet Virgin Mary, Mother of God,
the maternal nurse of religious virtues, that your Institutes may
continue to grow daily, and bear ever richer and more salutary fruits.

