____________________

[8]Pope Saint Leo the Great - On the Feast of Saint Laurence the Martyr

[9]detail of a painting of Saint Lawrence of Rome; early 16th century
by Creator:Francesco Rizzo da Santacroce; Museum of John Paul II
Collection, Warsaw, Poland; swiped from Wikimedia Commons

1. The example
of the martyrs is most valuable.

Whilst the height of all virtues, dearly-beloved, and the fullness of
all righteousness is born of that love, wherewith God and one's
neighbour is loved, surely in none is this love found more conspicuous
and brighter than in the blessed martyrs; who are as near to our Lord
Jesus, Who died for all men, in the imitation of His love, as in the
likeness of their suffering. For, although that Love, wherewith the
Lord has redeemed us, cannot be equaled by any man's kindness, because
it is one thing that a man who is doomed to die one day should die for
a righteous man, and another that One Who is free from the debt of sin
should lay down His life for the wicked: yet the martyrs also have done
great service to all men, in that the Lord Who gave them boldness, has
used it to show that the penalty of death and the pain of the cross
need not be terrible to any of His followers, but might be imitated by
many of them. If therefore no good man is good for himself alone, and
no wise man's wisdom befriends himself only, and the nature of true
virtue is such that it leads many away from the dark error on which its
light is shed, no model is more useful in teaching God's people than
that of the martyrs. Eloquence may make intercession easy, reasoning
may effectually persuade; but yet examples are stronger than words, and
there is more teaching in practice than in precept.

The Saint's martyrdom described.

And how gloriously strong in this most excellent manner of doctrine the
blessed martyr Laurentius is, by whose sufferings to-day is marked,
even his persecutors were able to feel, when they found that his
wondrous courage, born principally of love for Christ, not only did not
yield itself, but also strengthened others by the example of his
endurance. For when the fury of the gentile potentates was raging
against Christ's most chosen members, and attacked those especially who
were of priestly rank, the wicked persecutor's wrath was vented on
Laurentius the deacon, who was pre-eminent not only in the performance
of the sacred rites, but also in the management of the church's
property, promising himself double spoil from one man's capture: for if
he forced him to surrender the sacred treasures, he would also drive
him out of the pale of true religion. And so this man, so greedy of
money and such a foe to the truth, arms himself with double weapon:
with avarice to plunder the gold; with impiety to carry off Christ. He
demands of the guileless guardian of the sanctuary that the church
wealth on which his greedy mind was set should be brought to him. But
the holy deacon showed him where he had them stored, by pointing to the
many troops of poor saints, in the feeding and clothing of whom he had
a store of riches which he could not lose, and which were the more
entirely safe that the money had been spent on so holy a cause.

The description of his sufferings continued.

The baffled plunderer, therefore, frets, and blazing out into hatred of
a religion, which had put riches to such a use, determines to pillage a
still greater treasure by carrying off that sacred deposit, wherewith
he was enriched, as he could find no solid hoard of money in his
possession. He orders Laurentius to renounce Christ, and prepares to
ply the deacon's stout courage with frightful tortures: and, when the
first elicit nothing, fiercer follow. His limbs, torn and mangled by
many cutting blows, are commanded to be broiled upon the fire in an
iron framework, which was of itself already hot enough to burn him, and
on which his limbs were turned from time to time, to make the torment
fiercer, and the death more lingering.

Laurentius has conquered his persecutor.

Thou gainest nothing, thou prevailest nothing, O savage cruelty. His
mortal frame is released from thy devices, and, when Laurentius departs
to heaven, thou art vanquished. The flame of Christ's love could not be
overcome by thy flames, and the fire which burnt outside was less keen
than that which blazed within. Thou didst but serve the martyr in thy
rage, O persecutor: thou didst but swell the reward in adding to the
pain. For what did thy cunning devise, which did not redound to the
conqueror's glory, when even the instruments of torture were counted as
part of the triumph? Let us rejoice, then, dearly-beloved, with
spiritual joy, and make our boast over the happy end of this
illustrious man in the Lord, Who is "wonderful in His saints," in whom
He has given us a support and an example, and has so spread abroad his
glory throughout the world, that, from the rising of the sun to its
going down, the brightness of his deacon's light doth shine, and Rome
is become as famous in Laurentius as Jerusalem was ennobled by Stephen.
By his prayer and intercession we trust at all times to be assisted;
that, because all, as the Apostle says, "who wish to live holily in
Christ, suffer persecution," we may be strengthened with the spirit of
love, and be fortified to overcome all temptations by the perseverance
of steadfast faith. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

