____________________

[8]Diu Satis - On A Return To Gospel Principles, by Pope Pius VII, 15 May
1800

1. To His Venerable Brothers, All Patriarchs, Primates,
Archbishops and Bishops in Union and Favor with the Apostolic See.

Venerable Brothers, We Give you Greeting and Our Apostolic Blessing.

Long enough have We been silent. Two months have already passed,
months of anxiety and toil, since God conferred on Us, despite Our
weakness, the burden of this high office of guiding the entire Church.
It is not so much custom as Our great love for you which impels Us to
address you by at least this letter.

We could have no sweeter nor so pleasant a task.

2. The particular part of Our duty which is expressed in the words,
"strengthen your brethren," also urges Us to do so. For at the present
turbulent time, as much as ever, Satan "has sought after us all in
order to sift us as wheat." Still who is so sluggish, so
different-minded to Us not to understand fully that Christ does what He
said He would do: "to pray for Peter that his faith should not fail
even in the present grim circumstances. Later ages will be amazed at
the wisdom, magnanimity, and firmness of Our predecessor Pius VI. We
could wish that We had also inherited his courage which withstood
unshaken the blows of every storm and misfortune.

3. Indeed, the famous Martin who long ago won great praise for this
See, commends faithfulness and fortitude to Us by his strengthening and
defense of the truth and by the endurance of labors and pains. He was
driven from his See and from the City, stripped of his rule, his rank,
and his entire fortune. As soon as he arrived in any peaceful place, he
was forced to move.

Despite his advanced age and an illness which prevented his walking, he
was banished to a remote land and repeatedly threatened with an even
more painful exile. Without the assistance offered by the pious
generosity of individuals, he would not have had food for himself and
his few attendants. Although he was tempted daily in his weakened and
lonely state, he never surrendered his integrity.

No deceit could trick, no fear perturb, no promises conquer, no
difficulties or dangers break him. His enemies could extract from him
no sign which would not prove to all that Peter "until this time and
forever lives in his successors and exercises judgement as is
particularly clear in every age" as an excellent writer at the Council
of Ephesus says.

4. It is a fact of very great importance, and it should be recalled
gratefully, that God conferred death on Pius VI (this expression is
better than that He took life from him) at a time when there was no
obstacle to duly deciding on his successor. Remember Our fear and
suspense when the [10]Cardinals were personally expelled from their
sees. Several of them were imprisoned, some hunted for their lives, and
many forced to cross the sea in depths of winter, deprived of their
possessions - all of them in want and separated from one another by
great distances. Since the enemy occupied the roads, they could not
correspond with one another nor were they allowed to go anywhere. It
was clear that they could never assemble to assist the Church if any
misfortune struck down Pius VI who was daily said to be between life
and death.

5. Who would have dared at that time, with our affairs assailed and
almost destroyed, to hope on the basis of human plans and help for what
has actually happened by the special kindness of God? Before he died,
Pius VI established the mode of holding the elections of his successors
and most of Italy was restored to peace. All arrangements were made for
the [11]cardinals to meet in Venice to vote under the protection of
Francis, Apostolic King of Hungary, illustrious King of Bohemia, and
Emperor-elect of the Romans.

6. From these events men should realize that all attempts to overthrow
the "House of God" are in vain. For this is the Church founded on
Peter, "Rock," not merely in name but in truth. Against this "the gates
of hell will not prevail" "for it is founded on a rock." There has
never been an enemy of the Christian religion who was not
simultaneously at wicked war with the See of Peter, since while this
See remained strong the survival of the Christian religion was assured.
As Saint Irenaeus proclaims openly to all, "by the order and succession
of the Roman pontiffs the tradition from the Apostles in the Church and
the proclamation of the truth has come down to us. And this is the
fullest demonstration that it is the one and the same life-giving faith
which has been preserved in the Church until now since the time of the
Apostles and has been handed on in truth."

7. This is the direction of attack chosen by those men of today who
replace with the defiling plague of false philosophy, the philosophy
(as the Greek Fathers in particular rightly name Christian teaching)
which the Son of God, who is eternal wisdom, brought down from heaven
and imparted to men.

But "it has been written" - and these words of Paul are aimed directly
at such men - "`I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the sense of
the sensible I will reject.' Where is a wise man, where a scribe, where
the examiner of this world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world?"

8. We are led to recall those words, venerable brothers, especially
since they marvellously refresh Us. They inspire Us to shun no toil on
behalf of Christ's Church which He has entrusted to Us to rule,
protect, adorn, and extend, despite Our fear of this unexpected burden.
Assuredly "He will make us fitting ministers of the new testament as
exaltation derives from the power of God and not from Ourselves."
Therefore I now urge you to join me and devote your eager effort to
this objective. May Christ's prayer to His Father never leave our
minds: "Holy Father, keep them in your name that they may be one as
We....not for these only (i.e. the Apostles) do I pray, but also for
those who through their word will believe in me that they all may be
one as you, Father, in me and I in you, that they also may be one in
us."

9. "It is Our particular duty," as Cyprian says (in On the Unity of the
Church), "to uphold and defend this unity" so that the world may see,
wonder and believe "that you have sent me," as Christ's prayer
continues. Christ is with Us and never leaves Our side; he strengthens
Us with the words: "Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it fear.

You believe in God, believe also in me." Relying on His help, let us
work for the common safety with combined zeal.

10. Consolation and cure is called for by cities, towns, countryside,
states, provinces, kingdoms, and nations, which for many years have
been attacked, defeated, destroyed, and made wretched. But this can be
sought and hoped for only from the teaching of Christ. We can now, with
greater confidence, rebuke those who think otherwise with the words of
Saint Augustine: "Let them give us an army composed of soldiers such as
Christ's teaching demands, such provincials, such veterans, such
spouses, such parents, such children, such masters, such servants, such
kings, such judges, and finally such men as repay debts to the public
treasury and such tax-officials as the Christian teaching prescribes."
Since they are not able to do so, "let them admit at once that
obedience to this teaching would be of great assistance to the state."

11. Therefore it is Our duty to help men and nations who are in
distress, and to eliminate all present and threatening evils. For
"Christ has given pastors and teachers for the perfecting of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the building up of Christ's
Body, until we all come together to the unity of faith and knowledge of
God's son."

If ever anything deters, prevents, or delays any one of us from
performing this task, what a disgraceful sin he will commit! Therefore,
omit no watchfulness, diligence, care, and effort, in order to "guard
the deposit" of Christ's teaching whose destruction has been planned,
as you know, by a great conspiracy.

12. Do not admit anyone to the clergy, entrust to no one the ministry
of the mysteries of God, allow no one to hear confessions or preach
sermons, do not transfer any administration or office to anyone, before
you carefully weigh, examine and "test their spirit to see if they are
of God."

13. Would that We had not learned by experience how many "false
apostles" the present age has spawned! These are "deceitful workmen who
transform themselves into apostles of Christ." Unless we are on our
guard "they will destroy the understanding of the faithful as the
serpent seduced Eve by his cleverness, and they will fall away from
their simplicity which is in Christ." While you must care for the whole
flock over which the Holy Spirit has placed you as bishop, the
watchfulness, eagerness, and effort of your fatherly love and
benevolence is demanded in particular by boys and young men. Christ by
example and statement has particularly entrusted these to us and the
enemies of private property and states who are striving to confound all
laws, divine and human, hope to effect their wicked plans chiefly by
corrupting their young minds. For they are aware that the young are
like soft wax and can easily be drawn in any direction, bent and
moulded and that they firmly retain a form once they have received it
and it has been hardened by advancing years; then they will reject a
different form. Hence the well-worn proverb from scripture: "A young
man will not depart from his way even when he has grown old."

14. Do not allow "that the children of this world be wiser in their
generation than the children of light." Carefully investigate the
directors given charge of boys and young men in seminaries and
colleges, and the courses they are to follow, the teachers chosen for
secondary schools, and the schools which are to be run. Keep out the
ravening wolves who do not spare the flock of innocent lambs, and expel
them if necessary by the way they entered. Eliminate them at once
"according to the power which the Lord gave you for edification." We
must use to the full this power to eradicate this very serious threat
to our children. This course is required for the safety of Church,
state, leaders, and all human beings; their safety should be dearer and
more important to Us than Our own life. Clement XIII treated this
subject in his Brief to you on 25th November 1766.

15. Books which openly oppose the teaching of Christ are to be burned.
Even more importantly, the eyes and minds of all must be kept from
books, which do so more stealthily and deceitfully. To recognize such
books, as Saint Cyprian says in On the Unity of the Church, "there is
not need of a long treatise and arguments: The sum of truth is a proof
easy for faith: the Lord says to Peter, `feed my sheep.'" So the sheep
of Christ should consider safe and eat cheerfully the food to which
Peter's voice and authority directs them; but despite any beauty and
charm, they should shun as harmful and plague-ridden, what this voice
forbids them. Those who do not comply are certainly not to be counted
among the sheep of Christ.

16. In this case We cannot overlook, keep silent or act sluggishly. For
unless this great license of thinking, speaking, writing, and reading
is repressed, it will appear that the strategy and armies of wise kings
and generals have relieved us for but a short time from this evil which
has crushed us for so long. But so long as its stock and seed is not
removed and destroyed (I shudder to say it but it must be said), it
will spread abroad and be strengthened to reach over the whole world.
To destroy it later or to rout it, legions, guards, watches, the
armories of cities, and the defenses of empires will not be enough.

17. Is any one of Us not aroused by the words God speaks to Us through
the prophet Ezechiel: "Son of man, I have given you as a guide to the
house of Israel: and you shall hear a word from my mouth, and you shall
proclaim to them from me. If when I say to the wicked, you shall die
the death, you do not proclaim it to him....the wicked man shall die in
his iniquity but I shall look for his blood from your hand." I confess
this statement startles me and prevents me from being slothful and
fearful in executing the demands of my office. I promise and swear that
I will always be not only your helper and supporter, but your chief and
leader.

18. Still another deposit which We must firmly protect is that of the
Church's holy laws by which it establishes its own practice, and over
which it alone has power. Under these laws, virtue and piety thrive;
the spouse of Christ terrifies her enemies as an army set in battle
array. Many of these laws are like foundations laid down to bear the
weight of the faith, as Our predecessor Saint Zosimus says. There is no
greater benefit or boast for kings and political leaders, as another
wise and brave predecessor, Saint Felix, wrote to Emperor Zeno, than
"to allow the Catholic Church to enjoy its own laws and not to let
anyone interfere with its liberty....For it is certain that it is
beneficial for their own affairs, as God has laid down, for kings to
submit their will to the priests of Christ when God's business is in
question, rather than imposing it."

19. Regarding the Church's property, wealth which has been vowed, holy
money, the substance of the saints - the business of God, as Fathers,
councils and scripture state - shall We give you any instructions about
this now that the Church has been wretchedly stripped of them? Only
this: to devote your efforts so that everyone will realize the truth of
the short statement of the synod of Aachen long ago. "Whoever takes
away or intends to take away what other faithful have given from the
heritage of their possessions for the care of their souls, the honor of
God, the beauty of His Church and the use of its ministers, assuredly
turns the gifts of others into danger for his own soul." "Not from an
eagerness to hold what we have or for the sake of worldly benefit, but
from reflection on the divine judgment, are we moved to reiterate the
command to be faithful and wise stewards." (Indeed, We can rightly
affirm this to all, no less strongly than Our predecessor Saint
Agapitus.) Christian kings and princes who rightly hold and boast that
they are "guardians" of the Church as Isaiah said, will withdraw from
no place at Our prayers, exhortations, warnings, or actions. But
certainly their faith, piety, justice, wisdom, and religion have given
Us great hope that they will ensure immediately that God receives His
own and that they will not let their ears resound with God's
complaints. "You have taken my silver and gold and my lovely desirable
things." Constantine the Great and Charlemagne were like these kings,
and their noble generosity and justice were chiefly directed to the
Church. The former asserted that he had known many kingdoms whose kings
had perished because they had despoiled the Church. Because of this he
commanded and urged his children and their successors at the head of
the state: "We forbid them to the extent of Our power by God and all
the merits of his saints to do such acts or agree with those who desire
to do them. But let them be helpers and defenders of the churches and
of the service of God insofar as they can."

20. I cannot conceal from you at the end of this letter, venerable
brothers, "Since my sorrow is great and the pain of my heart
unceasing," my feelings for my children, the peoples of France, and
other peoples still seething with the same madness. Nothing would be
more desirable to me than to give my life for them if their safety
could be achieved by my death. We do not deny - rather, We proclaim -
that the bitterness of Our grief is much diminished by the invincible
purpose which several of you have displayed. We remember this daily.
Men of all kinds, age, and rank have followed this example. They do so,
preferring to suffer any insults, dangers, losses, and penalties, and
to face death itself. They consider this nobler than to be defiled by
the stain of an illicit and wicked sacrament thereby committing sin and
disobeying the decrees of the Apostolic See. Indeed, the courage of
ancient times has been renewed no less than the cruelty.

21. But every people is embraced by my fatherly love, thoughts, and
concern. We grieve and suffer greatly if any are separated from the
truth, and We desire to assist them. Join us, then, in Our prayers that
after this long-lasting disturbance, "the Church may have peace to be
built up as it walks in the fear of the Lord and in the consolation of
the Holy Spirit." May nothing hinder all peoples from becoming one fold
with one shepherd.

22. Meanwhile We most willingly impart the Apostolic Blessing to you in
your courage and preparedness, and to the flock you govern.

Given at Venice in the monastery of San Giorgio Maggiore on the 15th of
May 1800 in the first year of Our pontificate.

