____________________

[8]In Dominico Agro - On Instruction in the Faith, by Pope Clement XIII, 14
June 1761

[9]Pope Clement XIII To the Venerable Brothers, the Patriarchs,
Primates, Archbishops and Bishops. Venerable Brothers, Greetings and
Apostolic Benediction.

1. In the Lord's field, for the tending of which Divine Providence
placed Us as overseer, there is nothing which demands as much vigilant
care and unremitting labor in its cultivation than guarding the good
seed of Catholic teaching which the Apostles received from Jesus Christ
and handed on to Us. If in laziness this is neglected, the enemy of the
human race will sow weeds while the workers sleep. Then weeds will be
found which should be committed to the flames rather than good grain to
store in the barns. However, Saint Paul strongly encourages Us to
protect the faith that the saints handed on to Us. He told Timothy to
preserve the sacred trust because dangerous times were coming when evil
and deceitful men would exist in the Church of God. The insidious
tempters would use their work to try to infect unwary minds with errors
which are hostile to evangelical truth.

2. It often happens that certain unworthy ideas come forth in the
Church of God which, although they directly contradict each other, plot
together to undermine the purity of the Catholic faith in some way. It
is very difficult to cautiously balance our speech between both enemies
in such a way that We seem to turn Our backs on none of them, but to
shun and condemn both enemies of Christ equally. Meanwhile the matter
is such that diabolical error, when it has artfully colored its lies,
easily clothes itself in the likeness of truth while very brief
additions or changes corrupt the meaning of expressions; and
confession, which usually works salvation, sometimes, with a slight
change, inches toward death.

3. The faithful--especially those who are simple or
uncultivated--should be kept away from dangerous and narrow paths upon
which they can hardly set foot without faltering. The sheep should not
be led to pasture through trackless places. Nor should peculiar
ideas--even those of Catholic scholars--be proposed to them. Rather,
only those ideas should be communicated which are definitely marked as
Catholic truth by their universality, ambiguity, and harmony. Besides,
since the crowd cannot go up to the mountain upon which the glory of
the Lord came down, and if whoever crosses the boundaries to see will
die, the teachers of the people should establish boundaries around them
so that no word strays beyond that which is necessary or useful for
salvation. The faithful should obey the apostolic advice not to know
more than is necessary, but to know in moderation.

4. The popes clearly understood this. They devoted all their efforts
not only to cut short with the sword of anathema the poisonous buds of
growing error, but also to cut away certain developing ideas which
either could prevent the Christian people unnecessarily from bearing a
greater fruit of faith or could harm the minds of the faithful by their
proximity to error. So the Council of Trent condemned those heresies
which tried at that time to dim the light of the Church and which led
Catholic truth into a clearer light as if the cloud of errors had been
dispersed. As our predecessors understood that that holy meeting of the
universal Church was so prudent in judgment and so moderate that it
abstained from condemning ideas which authorities among Church scholars
supported, they wanted another work prepared with the agreement of that
holy council which would cover the entire teaching which the faithful
should know and which would be far removed from any error. They printed
and distributed this book under the title of The Roman Catechism. There
are aspects of their action worthy of special praise. In it they
compiled the teaching which is common to the whole Church and which is
far removed from every danger of error, and they proposed to transmit
it openly to the faithful in very eloquent words according to the
precept of Christ the Lord who told the apostles to proclaim in the
light what He had said in the dark and to proclaim from the rooftops
what they heard in secret. They have obeyed His bride, the Church,
whose words are, "Show me where you recline at midday". For where it is
not midday and the light is not so bright that truth can be clearly
known, error can easily be mistaken for truth because of its appearance
of truth and can be distinguished from truth only with difficulty in
the darkness. They knew that there were before and would again be
people who attract those who seek food by the promise of more abundant
pastures of wisdom and knowledge and that many people would come to
those pastures because stolen waters are sweeter and hidden bread more
delightful. Therefore, in case the Church should be deceived and wander
after the flocks of the companions who are themselves wanderers and
unsettled with no certainty of truth, who are always learning but never
arriving at the knowledge of truth, they proposed that only what is
necessary and very useful for salvation be clearly and plainly
explained in the Roman Catechism and communicated to the faithful.

5. But even though this book, composed with remarkable work and effort,
was universally approved and welcomed with the highest praises, at that
time, the love of novelty almost wrested it from the priests' hands by
inspiring the production of more and more catechisms which could
compare in no way with the Roman Catechism. Thus two evils arose.
Agreement on a method of teaching was almost destroyed, and the weak
members of the faithful were scandalized at finding that they were no
longer united by the same language and topics. On the other hand,
contentions arose from different ways of transmitting Catholic truth
and disunity of spirit and great disagreements from rivalry while one
declared he was a follower of Apollo, another of Cephas, and another of
Paul. We think that nothing can be more fatal to God's greater glory
than the bitterness of those disagreements. Nothing can eliminate more
disastrously the fruits which the faithful should gain from Christian
discipline. Thus, in order to remove the double evil from the Church,
We must return to that method from which some, setting themselves up in
the Church as wiser, have insolently and imprudently led the faithful
away for some time. We think that the Roman Catechism should be offered
to the priests again so that just as it once strengthened the Catholic
faith and strengthened the minds of the faithful in the Church's
teaching which is the pillar of truth, it may now turn them away from
new ideas which neither antiquity nor unanimity recommend. To make the
book more easily accessible and to correct the errors which have
occurred in course of production, We have ensured that the copy
published by Our predecessor Saint Pius V in accordance with the decree
of the Council of Trent is reprinted in Rome with all care. The
vernacular translation of it which was made and published by order of
the same Saint Pius will be reprinted very soon by Our order and will
finally be published.

6. So since Our care and diligence are providing a very suitable aid to
remove the deceptions of wicked ideas at this very difficult time for
the Church and to spread and establish true and sound teaching, it is
your duty to see to it that the faithful accept it. Because the popes
wanted this book set before pastors almost as the norm of Catholic
faith and Christian discipline in order that unanimity might exist also
in the method of transmitting doctrine, We now strongly recommend it to
you, venerable brothers. We strongly encourage you to order that
everybody who has the care of souls should use it in instructing the
faithful in the Catholic truth in order to preserve unity of learning,
charity, and harmony of spirits. For it is your duty to be attentive to
everybody's serenity. Finally, it is the bishop's duty to watch
carefully that nobody breaks the bond of unity and creates schisms by
proudly acting in his own interests.

7. If those who ought to present and explain these books to the
faithful are unsuitable teachers, they will prove useless or almost
useless. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance that you choose for
the office of communicating Christian teaching to the faithful not only
men endowed with theological knowledge, but more importantly, men who
manifest humility, enthusiasm for sanctifying souls, and charity. The
totality of Christian practice does not consist in abundance of words
nor in skill of debating nor in the search from praise and glory but in
true and voluntary humility. There are those whom a greater wisdom
raises up but also separates from the society of other people. The more
they know, the more they dislike the virtue of harmony. Wisdom itself
warns them with the word of God: "Have salt in yourselves and be at
peace among us". Thus it is necessary to have the salt of wisdom to
preserve the love of neighbor and to offset weaknesses. If they turn
from zeal for wisdom and from concern for their neighbor to
disagreement, they have salt without peace--not a gift of virtue but a
cause for condemnation. The more they know, the worse they fail. The
Apostle James condemns them with these words: "If you are jealous and
have contentions in your hearts, do not boast and be liars against the
truth. This wisdom did not come down from on high. Rather, it is
earthly, animal, diabolical. Inconstancy and every wicked deed
accompany jealousy and contention. The wisdom which comes from on high
is first of all pure. Then it is peaceful, modest, persuasive,
agreeable to good things, full of mercy and good fruits. It does not
judge and is without rivalry".

8. Therefore, while We pray to God in affliction of spirit and in
humility of heart to bestow his indulgence and mercy on our efforts to
prevent disagreement disturbing the faithful, and to ensure that in the
bond of peace and in charity of spirit, we all know, praise, and
glorify the one God and our Lord Jesus Christ, We greet you with a holy
kiss and We lovingly impart Our apostolic blessing to all of you and to
all the faithful of your churches.

Given at Castel Gandolfo on the 14th day of June, 1761, the third year
of Our Pontificate.

