____________________

[8]Pope Boniface VIII - Unam Sanctam - One God, One Faith, One Spiritual
Authority - 18 November 1302

[9]statue of Pope Boniface VIII by Arnolfo di Cambio, c.1296, Vatican
Museum

1. Urged by faith, we are obliged to believe and to maintain that
the Church is one, holy, catholic, and also apostolic. We believe in
her firmly and we confess with simplicity that outside of her there is
neither salvation nor the remission of sins, as the Spouse in the
Canticles [Sgs 6:8] proclaims: `One is my dove, my perfect one. She is
the only one, the chosen of her who bore her,' and she represents one
sole mystical body whose Head is Christ and the head of Christ is God
[1 Cor 11:3]. In her then is one Lord, one faith, one [10]baptism
[Ephesians 4:5]. There had been at the time of the deluge only one ark
of Noah, prefiguring the one Church, which ark, having been finished to
a single cubit, had only one pilot and guide, i.e., Noah, and we read
that, outside of this ark, all that subsisted on the earth was
destroyed.

We venerate this Church as one, the Lord having said by the mouth of
the prophet: `Deliver, O God, my soul from the sword and my only one
from the hand of the dog.' [Ps 21:20] He has prayed for his soul, that
is for himself, heart and body; and this body, that is to say, the
Church, He has called one because of the unity of the Spouse, of the
faith, of the sacraments, and of the charity of the Church. This is the
tunic of the Lord, the seamless tunic, which was not rent but which was
cast by lot [Jn 19:23- 24]. Therefore, of the one and only Church there
is one body and one head, not two heads like a monster; that is, Christ
and the Vicar of Christ, Peter and the successor of Peter, since the
Lord speaking to Peter Himself said: `Feed my sheep' [Jn 21:17],
meaning, my sheep in general, not these, nor those in particular,
whence we understand that He entrusted all to him [Peter]. Therefore,
if the Greeks or others should say that they are not confided to Peter
and to his successors, they must confess not bei ng the sheep of
Christ, since Our Lord says in John `there is one sheepfold and one
shepherd.' We are informed by the texts of the gospels that in this
Church and in its power are two swords; namely, the spiritual and the
temporal. For when the Apostles say: `Behold, here are two swords' [Lk
22:38] that is to say, in the Church, since the Apostles were speaking,
the Lord did not reply that there were too many, but sufficient.
Certainly the one who denies that the temporal sword is in the power of
Peter ha s not listened well to the word of the Lord commanding: `Put
up thy sword into thy scabbard' [Mt 26:52]. Both, therefore, are in the
power of the Church, that is to say, the spiritual and the material
sword, but the former is to be administered _for_ the Church but the
latter_by_ the Church; the former in the hands of the priest; the
latter by the hands of kings and soldiers, but at the will and
sufferance of the priest.

However, one sword ought to be subordinated to the other and temporal
authority, subjected to spiritual power. For since the Apostle said:
`There is no power except from God and the things that are, are
ordained of God' [Rom 13:1-2], but they would not be ordained if one
sword were not subordinated to the other and if the inferior one, as it
were, were not led upwards by the other.

For, according to the Blessed Dionysius, it is a law of the divinity
that the lowest things reach the highest place by intermediaries. Then,
according to the order of the universe, all things are not led back to
order equally and immediately, but the lowest by the intermediary, and
the inferior by the superior. Hence we must recognize the more clearly
that spiritual power surpasses in dignity and in nobility any temporal
power whatever, as spiritual things surpass the temporal. This we see
very clearly also by the payment, benediction, and consecration of the
tithes, but the acceptance of power itself and by the government even
of things. For with truth as our witness, it belongs to spiritual power
to establish the terrestrial power and to pass judgement if it has not
been good. Thus is accomplished the prophecy of Jeremias concerning the
Church and the ecclesiastical power: `Behold to-day I have placed you
over nations, and over kingdoms' and the rest. Therefore, if the
terrestrial power err, it will be judged by the spiritual power; but if
a minor spiritual power err, it will be judged by a superior spiritual
power; but if the highest power of all err, it can be judged only by
God, and not by man, according to the testimony of the Apostle: `The
spiritual man judgeth of all things and he himself is judged by no man'
[1 Cor 2:15]. This authority, however, (though it has been given to man
and is exercised by man), is not human but rather divine, granted to
Peter by a divine word and reaffirmed to him (Peter) and his successors
by the One Whom Peter confessed, the Lord saying to Peter himself,
`Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound also in Heaven'
etc., [Mt 16:19]. Therefore whoever resists this power thus ordained by
God, resists the ordinance of God [Rom 13:2] , unless he invent like
Manicheus two beginnings, which is false and judged by us heretical,
since according to the testimony of Moses, it is not in the beginnings
but in the beginning that God created heaven and earth [Gen 1:1].
Furthermore, we declare, we proclaim, we define that it is absolutely
necessary for salvation that every human creature be subject to the
Roman Pontiff.

- [11]Pope [12]Boniface VIII

