____________________

[8]Pope Pius VI - Charitas - On the Civil Oath in France, 13 April 1791

1. To Our Beloved Sons, the [10]Cardinals of the Holy
Roman Church, to Our Venerable Brothers the Archbishops and Bishops,
and to Our Beloved Children the Capitulars, Clergy and People of the
Kingdom of France. Beloved Sons, Venerable Brothers and Beloved
Children, We give you greeting and Our Apostolic Blessing.

Love, which is patient and kindly, as the Apostle Paul says,
supports and endures all things as long as a hope remains that mildness
will prevent the growth of incipient errors. But if errors increase
daily and reach the point of creating schism, the laws of love itself,
together with Our duty, demand that We reveal to the erring their
horrible sin and the heavy canonical penalties which they have
incurred. For this sternness will lead those who are wandering from the
way of truth to recover their senses, reject their errors, and come
back to the Church, which opens its arms like a kind mother and
embraces them on their return. The rest of the faithful in this way
will be quickly delivered from the deceits of false pastors who enter
the fold by ways other than the door, and whose only aim is theft,
slaughter, and destruction.

2. With these divine precepts in mind, We have just learned of the war
against the Catholic religion which has been started by the
revolutionary thinkers who as a group form a majority in the National
Assembly of France. We have wept in God's presence, shared Our sorrow
with the [11]cardinals, and proclaimed public and private prayers. Then
We wrote to King Louis, on July 9, 1790, and repeatedly encouraged him
not to confirm the Civil Constitution of the Clergy which would lead
his people into error and schism. For it was intolerable that a
political assembly should change the universal practice of the Church,
disregard the opinions of the holy Fathers and the decrees of the
councils, overturn the order of the hierarchy and control the election
of bishops, destroy episcopal sees, and introduce a worse form into the
Church after removing the better.

3. We sent two briefs on the following day to the archbishops of
Bordeaux and Vienne who were with the King, urging them in fatherly
fashion to advise the king that if he lent his authority to this
Constitution, his kingdom would be in schism; furthermore We would
regard any bishops appointed in accordance with its decrees as
schismatic and lacking all ecclesiastical jurisdiction. To remove all
doubt that Our concern was solely with matters of religion and to
silence the enemies of this Apostolic See, We gave orders that the
collection of taxes from French revenues should be discontinued,
although these taxes were due for Our services from unbroken custom and
earlier agreements.

4. The king would certainly have refrained from approving the
Constitution, but the National Assembly finally forced him to lend his
authority to the Constitution as his letters to Us on July 28,
September 6, and December 16 attest. He besought Us insistently to
approve five, and later seven, articles at least provisionally. These
articles were so similar in tenor that they formed a comprehensive
summary of the new Constitution.

5. We saw at once, of course, that We could approve or tolerate none of
the articles since they were at variance with canonical regulations.
However, We did not want to give Our enemies an opportunity to deceive
the nations by claiming that We were opposed to every sort of
negotiations: therefore We told the King in Our letter of August 17
that We would consider the articles carefully and consult with the
[12]cardinals, who would meet to discuss every aspect of the proposal.

After the [13]cardinals had met on September 24 and December 16 to
discuss the first two articles, they decided unanimously to request the
opinions of the French bishops on these articles in case they could
show some canonical reason for approval.

Such a reason was not easily imaginable at this distance from France,
as We had said earlier in other letters to the King.

6. In the meanwhile, We were greatly consoled when a majority of the
French bishops firmly opposed the Constitution and attacked every point
in it which referred to the government of the Church. Our consolation
was increased when [14]Cardinal Rochefoucauld, the [15]archbishop of
Aix, and thirty other archbishops and bishops appealed to Us for
assistance in meeting such great dangers. On October 10 they sent an
explanation of the main points contained in the Constitution of the
Clergy and requested Our help and advice. We were further consoled
because many other bishops joined the thirty in accepting this
explanation. Only four out of one hundred and thirty-one bishops
dissented. A great number of capitulars and most of the parish priests
and lower clergy also joined the bishops. So this explanation, accepted
with harmonious unanimity, should be regarded as the teaching of the
entire French Church.

7. We Ourselves immediately engaged in the task of examining all the
articles of the Constitution. The Assembly, although it heard the
unanimous views of the French Church, did not abandon its design, but
tried all the more to destroy the firmness of the bishops. But it knew
well that none of the metropolitans or the senior bishops would agree
to ordain new bishops who were elected in the municipal districts by
laity, heretics, unbelievers, and Jews as the published decrees
commanded. It also understood that this foolish form of Church
government could nowhere survive, for without the bishops the entire
appearance of the church would vanish. As a result the Assembly
considered publishing other even more foolish decrees, and did so on
November 15 and 27, 1790, and January 3, 4, and 26, 1791. These
decrees, with the king's approval, provided that any bishop from a
different district could consecrate the elected persons if the
metropolitan or senior bishop refused to do so. Furthermore, to
instantly disperse all faithful bishops and parish priests, the decrees
provided that all pastors should swear unequivocally that they would
observe the Constitution already published and the one which was to be
published later. Those who refused were to be considered expelled from
their office, and their sees and parishes were to lose their pastor.
When the lawful pastors and ministers were driven out, by force if
necessary, the municipal districts could set about electing new bishops
and parish priests. Upon election these men were to disregard the
metropolitans and senior bishops who had refused the oath, and to go to
the Assembly Executive which would appoint some bishops to ordain them.

8. These later decrees have immeasurably renewed Our sorrow. Moreover
they made it more difficult for Us to send the bishops the answer which
We were then preparing, since We then had to take account of these
developments. They caused Us to proclaim public prayers to beseech God
for help. New pastoral letters to their flocks were published by the
French bishops who had already begun the attack on the Constitution of
the Clergy with remarkable astuteness. Now they devoted all their
efforts to oppose the provision on the deposition of bishops, the
vacating of episcopal sees, and the election and ordination of new
bishops. They agreed that these civil oaths should be regarded as
perjury and sacrilege, unbefitting not merely the clergy but any
Catholic; all actions which are based on these oaths should be seen as
schismatic, null, void, and liable to severe censures.

9. These praiseworthy statements of the French clergy have been put
into effect. Almost all the bishops and most of the parish priests have
refused the oath with unconquerable firmness. The enemies of religion
then realized correctly that their vicious plans would come to nothing
unless they persuaded some bishop, either by appealing to his ambition
or his stupidity, to take the oath to observe the Constitution and to
undertake sacrilegious consecrations and so, to initiate a schism.
Among those who have been overcome by this wicked deceit the first was
Charles bishop of Autun, the greatest enthusiast for the Constitution;
second was Jean-Joseph bishop of Lidda; third was Louis bishop of
Orleans; fourth, Charles bishop of Viviers; fifth, [16]Cardinal de
Lomenie, [17]Archbishop of Sens; and a few wretched pastors of lower
rank.

10. As regards [18]Cardinal de Lomenie, he tried to excuse himself for
taking the oath in a letter to Us last November 25. He stated that it
was not to be regarded as mental assent and claimed that he was quite
undecided on the question of ordaining bishops who had been elected.
(He had not yet done so.) Since it was most important that none of the
bishops should consecrate those elected and so broaden the road to
schism, We decided to postpone a little Our answer to the bishops,
which was near completion; instead We wrote to the [19]cardinal without
delay on February 23. We pointed out to him the error of his opinion in
taking the oath, and the canonical penalties which with sadness We
would be obliged to apply, stripping him of the rank of [20]Cardinal
unless he removed the public scandal by a timely and appropriate
retraction. As to his indecision about ordaining those elected, in
answer We commanded him not to ordain new bishops for any reason
whatsoever, and so join new rebels to the church. For the right of
ordaining bishops-belongs only to the Apostolic See, as the Council of
Trent declares; it cannot be assumed by any bishop or metropolitan
without obliging Us to declare schismatic both those who ordain and
those who are ordained, thus invalidating their future actions.

11. When We had completed this business, We resumed the task of
replying to the bishops. This task had become more troublesome and
time-consuming because of the many new developments which subsequently
affected it. After examining all the articles in order to make clear to
everyone that in the judgment of this Holy See, which has been sought
by the French bishops and is eagerly awaited by French Catholics, We
declared that the new Constitution of the Clergy is composed of
principles derived from heresy. It is consequently heretical in many of
its decrees and at variance with Catholic teaching. In other decrees it
is sacrilegious and schismatic. It overturns the rights and primacy of
the Church, is opposed to ancient and modern practice, and is devised
and published with the sole design of utterly destroying the Catholic
religion. For it is only this religion which cannot be freely
professed, whose lawful pastors are removed, and whose property is
taken over. Men of other sects are left at liberty and in possession of
their property. We pointed all this out clearly, but We stated mildly
that We had hitherto refrained from excommunicating the authors of the
ill-omened Civil Constitution of the Clergy. It was Our duty, however,
to emphasize that We would be obliged against Our will to declare
schismatic all who did not reject the errors We had revealed (the
customary procedure of this Holy See in these cases). This threat
applied to the authors of the Constitution as well as to those who
swore to observe it, whether they supervised the election of new
bishops, consecrated those who were elected, or accepted this
consecration. For none of these would have either a lawful appointment
or be in communion with the Church.

12. We are ready to show as much favor to the French people as We can
without prejudicing the teaching and universal practice of the Church.
Thus We have followed the advice of the [21]Cardinals whom We consulted
on this matter, repeating the message which We sent by letter to the
King. We have urged the bishops who are living in the midst of these
developments to inform Us of any other possible method of action which
is not in opposition to Catholic teaching and universal practice, and
to submit it for Our consideration. We have mentioned Our intentions to
the King and have sent him a copy of Our answer to the bishops. We have
also urged him to take the wiser bishops into his counsel in order to
apply an appropriate remedy to the disease which derives in part from
the royal authorization. Finally We have informed him that out of
pastoral duty, We will take the same measures against those who remain
obstinate in their error as Our predecessors took when faced with a
similar necessity.

13. Our March 10 letters to the King and to the bishops were both
entrusted to an express messenger who left early the next day. On the
15th a regular messenger arrived from France, and We learned from many
sources that the schism had been completed in Paris on February 24th.
For on that day the bishop of Autun, already stained with perjury and
guilty of desertion for relinquishing his church into the hands of
laymen on his own authority, defied his chapter, by joining with the
bishops of Babylon and Lidda. The bishop of Babylon had received the
honor of the pallium from Us and temporal aid as well, but he showed
that he was a worthy successor of another bishop of Babylon, Dominicus
Varlet, notorious for the schism of Utrecht. The bishop of Lidda was
also guilty of perjury, and had incurred the hatred and abhorrence of
good men for his dissent from the correct teaching of the bishop and
chapter of the church at Basel of which he is a suffragan. So on that
day the bishop of Autun, with the assistance of these two bishops,
rashly and sacrilegiously consecrated Alois Alexandre Expilly and
Claude Eustache Francois Marolles, in a church of the priests of the
Oratory without permission of the Ordinary. They had received no
commission to do so from the Apostolic See; they omitted the oath of
obedience to the Pope; they neglected the examination and confession of
faith which are prescribed in the Roman pontifical which should be
observed universally; and they broke and despised all laws. They did
this even though they must have known that the former candidate had
been wrongly elected bishop of Quimper against the serious and repeated
objections of the chapter, and that the latter was far more wrongly
given as bishop to the church of Soissons since this church has a
lawful pastor alive and well, Our venerable brother Henry Joseph Claude
de Bourdeilles. He consequently considered that it was his duty to
attack violently this great act of profanation and to provide ready
help for his diocese. His letter published on the following day, the
25th, attests that he did so.

14. At the same time We learned that the bishop of Lidda had piled sin
on top of sin. For on February 27, with the assistance of the new
spurious bishops Expilly and Marolles, he rashly and sacrilegiously in
the same church consecrated the parish priest Saurine as bishop of Aix,
although this flourishing church rejoices in its own bishop, Our
venerable brother Charles Auguste Lequien. Perhaps in appreciation of
these actions, the bishop of Lidda, Jean Joseph Gobel, was elected
[22]archbishop of Paris, while the [23]archbishop there was still
living. He is following the example of Ischyras, who was proclaimed
bishop of Alexandria at the Council of Tyre as payment for his sinful
service in accusing Saint Athanasius and ejecting him from his See.

15. This sad and burdensome news overwhelmed Us with sorrow. But
uplifted by hope in God, We again summoned the assembly of the
[24]Cardinals on March 17 to learn their views on this important
development. While We were engaged in consultation with the
[25]cardinals on the 21st, another messenger from France brought Us
word that the bishop of Laye had grown even more evil. With the
assistance of the spurious bishops Expilly and Saurine, he had on the
6th in the same church and with the same sacrilege consecrated as
bishop of Beauvais the parish priest Massieu, a deputy of the French
Assembly; as bishop of Evreux another deputy, the parish priest Lindet;
as bishop of Moulins the parish priest Laurent, also a deputy; and the
parish priest Heraudin as bishop of Chateauroux. They dared to do this,
even though the first two of these churches have their own lawful
pastors and the other two have not yet been created episcopal sees by
Apostolic Authority. The proper view regarding men who allow themselves
to be elected and consecrated for churches whose bishops are still
governing and administering, was well expressed by Saint Leo many years
ago. In a letter to Julian, bishop of Cos, (chap. 4), he attacked a
certain Theodosius who had occupied the see of Bishop Juvenal while he
was still alive. "The nature of the deed leaves no doubt about the
character of a man who usurps the place of a bishop in his lifetime. It
is perfectly clear that he is wicked, since he is loved by the enemies
of the faith."

16. The Church has at all times rightly rejected men elected by a low
mob of the laity, men who share the same wrong opinions as their
electors. This is abundantly proved by the pastoral letter of "Bishop"
Expilly brought by the same messenger. It was published on February 25
to deceive the simple-minded, and obviously aimed at rending the
seamless garment of Christ. This man first mentions the oath (that is,
the perjury) he has sworn, and introduces all the principal assertions
of the French Constitution which he copies almost word-for- word. In
accord with the statements of the Assembly, he attempts to prove that
Christian dogma is not affected by this Constitution, while a better
form of Church order is introduced which is closer to the purity of
early centuries. He states that this is particularly true of the
section which restores ecclesiastical elections to the people and
consecrations to the metropolitans; but he established his claim only
by former decrees of the French Assembly. The better to impress the
simple-minded, he mentions his letter to Us of November 18, 1790, as if
he enjoyed communion with this Apostolic See. He then addresses the
different groups in the diocese and admonishes them all to receive him
as their lawful pastor and to embrace the Constitution unreservedly.

17. Woe to the wretch! We purposely pass by matters relating to the
civil government, but how rash he was to try to defend a Constitution
concerning the affairs of the Church which nearly all the bishops of
the French Church and many others of the clergy condemned and rejected
as opposed to Church teaching and completely at variance with common
practice, especially in regard to the election and consecration of
bishops! Not even he could have concealed the evident truth, if he had
not carefully avoided any mention of the most recent foolish decrees to
come from the Assembly. For alongside other wickedness, these decrees
go so far as to give the right of consecrating to any bishop at the
discretion of the Assembly Executive.

18. Let this unfortunate man, who has advanced so far along the road to
perdition, read Our answer to the French bishops; he will see the truth
which he hates shining clear in every article, for at the start We have
refuted the amazing errors contained in his letter. Meanwhile let him
be aware that he has pronounced sentence on himself. He claims that the
one elected must be consecrated by his metropolitan to obtain his
lawful title in accordance with the ancient practice deriving from a
canon of Nicaea; this right of the metropolitans derives from the right
of the Apostolic See. If this is true, then how can Expilly think that
he is lawfully and canonically installed since he owes his consecration
not to the [26]archbishop of Tours to whom the church of Quimper is
suffragan, but to other bishops? For even if these men by their rash
sacrilege could confer the rank of bishop on him, they certainly could
not give him a jurisdiction which they themselves do not possess in
accordance with the practice of every century, since they belong to
different provinces. Moreover, this power of giving jurisdiction as a
consequence of a new practice established now for several centuries and
confirmed by general councils and even by concordats, has returned to
its point of origin and does not belong in any way to metropolitans,
but resides solely in the Apostolic See. So today the Pope as a duty of
his office appoints bishops for each of the churches, and no lawful
consecration may take place in the entire Catholic Church without the
order of the Apostolic See (Trent, session 24, chap. 1, de Reformat.).

19. His letter to Us, far from relieving his plight, worsens it, and
must be called schismatic. For that letter makes a mere pretense of
establishing communion with Us, since it does not even mention the
confirmation which We must give; it simply informs Us of the unlawful
election as provided for in the French decrees. Hence, following the
precedent of Our predecessors, We did not consider answering his
letter; rather We gave orders that he should be warned to proceed no
further, since We expected that he would attempt to do so. The bishop
of Rennes indeed, of his own accord, had given him similar warning when
he refused him the confirmation which he was insistently asking for.
Therefore, instead of accepting him as their pastor, the people should
reject him with abhorrence as an intruder. For he has failed to profess
the truth which he must acknowledge; he has begun to put his so-called
pastoral duty to bad uses; and lastly he has become so presumptuous as
to relax the Lenten observance commanded by the Church, at the end of
his pastoral letter. So "he is an imitator of the devil and does not
stand firm in the truth, but makes bad use of the appearance and name
of the office he has attained," as Saint Leo the Great wrote to some
Egyptian bishops concerning a similar intruder.

20. From this series of sins schism is being introduced and spread in
the kingdom of France, which is so dear to Us and has served religion
so well; for the same reason pastors of first and second rank are being
everywhere elected as the days go by, legitimate ministers are ejected
from their positions, and ravening wolves are put in their place. We
are certainly saddened by this sorrowful situation. Therefore to hinder
the spread of schism from the start, to recall to their duty those who
have strayed, to fortify the good in their purpose, and to preserve
religion in that prosperous kingdom, We follow the advice of the
[27]Cardinals and answer the prayers of the entire group of bishops of
the French church. Imitating the example of Our predecessors, We
proclaim that each and every [28]cardinal, archbishop, bishop, abbot,
vicar, canon, parish priest, curate and member of the clergy, whether
secular or regular, who has purely and simply taken the Civil Oath as
ordered by the National Assembly is suspended from the exercise of his
office and will act irregularly if he exercises his office unless he
[29]abjures his oath within forty days from this date. For the oath is
the poisoned source and origin of all errors and the chief cause of the
sorrow of the French Catholic church.

21. Furthermore, We declare specifically that the elections of the said
Expilly, Marolles, Saurine, Massieu, Lindet, Laurent, Heraudin, and
Gobel as Bishops of Quimper, Soissons, Aix, Beauvais, Evreux, Moulins,
Chateauroux, and Paris are unlawful, sacrilegious, and utterly void. We
rescind, efface, and abrogate them, as well as the recent creation of
the so-called dioceses of Moulins, Chateauroux, and others.

22. We similarly declare and decree that their consecrations were
sinful, and are illicit, unlawful, sacrilegious, and at variance with
the regulations of the sacred canons; since they were rashly and
wrongfully elected, they lack all ecclesiastical and spiritual
jurisdiction for the guidance of souls, and have been suspended from
all exercise of the episcopal office.

23. We declare likewise that Charles, bishop of Autun; Jean-Baptiste,
bishop of Babylon; and Jean-Joseph, bishop of Lidda have been suspended
from all exercise of their episcopal office as sacrilegious
consecrators or assistants; all who gave them help, consent, or counsel
at those accursed consecrations have been suspended from the exercise
of their priestly, or other, office.

24. We therefore severely forbid the said Expilly and the other
wickedly elected and illicitly consecrated men, under this punishment
of suspension, to assume episcopal jurisdiction or any other authority
for the guidance of souls since they have never received it. They must
not grant dimissorial letters for ordinations. Nor must they appoint,
depute, or confirm pastors, vicars, missionaries, helpers,
functionaries, ministers, or others, whatever their title, for the care
of souls and the administration of the Sacraments under any pretext of
necessity whatsoever. Nor may they otherwise act, decree, or decide,
whether separately or united as a council, on matters which relate to
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. For We declare and proclaim publicly that
all their dimissorial letters and deputations or confirmations, past
and future, as well as all their rash proceedings and their
consequences, are utterly void and without force.

25. We also command and prohibit under the same punishment of
suspension both the men consecrated and their consecrators from
illicitly conferring the sacrament of confirmation or of orders, or
exercising in any way the episcopal office from which they have been
suspended. Consequently anyone ordained by them should realize that he
is suspended and will be guilty of irregularity if he exercises the
orders he has received.

26. However to prevent greater evils, We decree and declare by this
letter and Our authority that all other elections by the electors of
municipal districts to French [30]cathedral and parochial churches,
whether vacant or occupied, whether old-established or recently and
unlawfully created in accordance with the said Constitution of the
Clergy, have been, are, and will be void, unlawful, sacrilegious, and
utterly null, and We hereby rescind, efface, and revoke them. We
therefore declare that men who have been or will be elected wickedly
and wrongfully, whether to [31]cathedral or parochial churches, lack
all ecclesiastical and spiritual jurisdiction for the guidance of souls
and that bishops who have been or will be illicitly consecrated are
suspended from all exercise of their episcopal office; parish priests
who have been or are to be invalidly appointed are suspended from their
priestly ministry. Accordingly We prohibit severely both those who have
been or are to be elected as bishops from rashly accepting episcopal
consecration from any metropolitan or bishop as well as the spurious
bishops and their sacrilegious consecrators and all other archbishops
and bishops from daring to consecrate on any pretext those who have
been or are to be wrongfully elected. Furthermore, We command those who
have been or are to be elected, to behave in no way as archbishops,
bishops, parish priests, or vicars nor to call themselves by the name
of any [32]cathedral or parochial church, nor to assume any
jurisdiction, authority, or faculty for the care of souls under the
penalty of suspension and invalidity. None of those who have been named
can ever be freed from the punishment of suspension, except by Us or by
delegates of the Apostolic See.

27. With the greatest possible kindness, We have declared the canonical
penalties imposed until the present in order that the evil deeds
already accomplished may be corrected and prevented from spreading
abroad. We hope in the Lord that the consecrators, the intruders in
[33]cathedral and parochial churches, and all the authors and
supporters of the published Constitution will recognize their error and
return repentant to the fold from which they were seduced by
treacherous deceit.

For this reason, We insistently urge them to retire from their
ministry, to draw back from the way to perdition on which they are
traveling at full speed, and never to allow strange doctrines which are
opposed to the teaching of Christ, the tradition of the Fathers, and
the law of the Church to be spread among the people by men inspired by
the philosophy of the present age. However, if Our mild manner of
action and paternal warnings come to nothing-may God prevent this!-they
should be aware that We do not intend to spare them those heavier
penalties to which they are liable under the canons. They may be quite
certain that We will anathematize them and proclaim them as such to the
whole Church, since they are schismatic and cut off from communion with
the Church and with Us.

For it is very fitting "that as each one chooses to lie in the mud of
his own foolishness, so the laws should stay firm, and he should have
the same lot as those whose error he has followed," as Leo the Great
says in his letter to Julian, bishop of Coensum.

28. We now address you, who with few exceptions know your duty to your
flocks, and publicly professed it, disregarding human calculations. You
judged that the greatest care and labor should be given to counter the
greatest dangers. We apply to you the lavish praise given by Leo the
Great to the Egyptian Catholic bishops in Constantinople: "Although I
heartily share your loving labors for the observance of the Catholic
faith, and I regard the attacks of the heretics on you as attacks on my
person, I realize that your invincible constancy by the strength of the
Lord Jesus Christ in the evangelical and apostolic teaching is reason
for joy rather than for sorrow. And when the enemies of the Christian
faith removed you from the sees of the churches, you preferred to
endure the evil of travel than to be defiled by any contact with their
impiety." Indeed as We consider you, We are consoled and strongly urge
you to stand fast in your purpose. To this end, We remind you of the
bond of spiritual marriage which unites you to your churches and which
only death or Our Apostolic authority can dissolve, according to the
provision of the canons. Stay with your churches, then, and never leave
them at the bidding of ravening wolves whose plots you have condemned
in holy zeal as you unhesitatingly performed the tasks of lawful
authority.

29. Next We address you, beloved sons, canons of excellent chapters.
Subject to your archbishops and bishops, as is right, you form one
clerical body as limbs which are united with their head, which the
civil power is unable to destroy or overthrow. You have won great
praise in following the remarkable example of your prelates: never turn
aside from the right road, on which you are set, and never allow anyone
in false bishop's garments with a company of subordinates to take
possession of your churches. For if the churches are deprived of their
bishops, they will be your concern alone, despite all new plots hatched
against you. Therefore, united in mind and counsel, keep as far from
you as possible all intrusion and schism.

30. We also address you, beloved sons, parish priests and curates, who
in great numbers and firm virtue have performed your duty far
differently from your colleagues who, overcome by weakness or swept
away by the tide of ambition, have gone over to the service of error.
We hope that these men will soon return to their duty on receiving Our
admonition. Press on bravely with the work you have begun, and bear in
mind that the appointment you received from your lawful bishops can be
taken from you only by them. Consequently, even if you are removed from
your place by the civil power, you will still always be the lawful
pastors, in duty bound as far as you are able to keep off the thieves
who try to sneak into your place with the sole aim of destroying the
souls entrusted to your care, whose salvation you will have to account
for.

31. We address you too, beloved sons, priests, and other clergy and
ministers of France. Since you have been called to the Lord's work, you
ought to stay close to your lawful pastors and be firm in faith and
doctrine. Above all, avoid and condemn the sacrilegious intruders.

32. At length We beseech you all, beloved Catholic children, in the
kingdom of France; as you recall the religion and faith of your
fathers, We urge you lovingly not to abandon it. For it is the one true
religion which both confers eternal life and makes safe and thriving
civil societies. Carefully beware of lending your ears to the
treacherous speech of the philosophy of this age which leads to death.
Keep away from all intruders, whether called archbishops, bishops, or
parish priests; do not hold communion with them especially in divine
worship. Listen carefully to the message of your lawful pastors who are
still living, and who will be put in charge of you later, according to
the canons. Finally, in one word, stay close to Us. For no one can be
in the Church of Christ without being in unity with its visible head
and founded on the See of Peter.

To inspire all to fulfill their duties more ardently, We implore the
heavenly Father to send you the Spirit of counsel, truth, and
constancy. As a pledge of Our paternal love, beloved sons, venerable
brothers and beloved children, We impart to you the Apostolic blessing.

Given at Rome in Saint Peter's under the Ring of the Fisherman on April
13, 1791, in the 17th year of Our pontificate.

