____________________

[8]Ubi Primum - On His Assuming the Pontificate, Pope Leo XII, 5 May 1824

[9]anonymous 19th century painting of Pope Leo XII; swiped from
Wikimedia Commons To All Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and
Bishops.

1. Venerable Brothers, We Give You Greeting and Our Apostolic
Blessing.

As soon as We were raised to the supreme pontificate, We began to
exclaim immediately with Saint Leo the Great: "O Lord I have heard your
utterance and been afraid: I have reflected on your works and been
terrified. For what is so unaccustomed and so much to be feared as toil
to the weak, height to the lowly, rank to the undeserving? Yet We do
not despair or faint since it is not on Ourselves that We depend but on
Him who works in Us." That praiseworthy pope spoke thus to humble
himself, but We can say and confess this in very truth.

2. We desired to address you as soon as possible, venerable brothers,
and to reveal Our feelings to you. For you are Our crown and joy, as
your flocks, We feel sure, are crown and joy to you. But partly because
We were preoccupied with the serious concerns of Our Apostolic office
and partly, indeed principally, because We were afflicted by a long
illness, until now We have been unable to do so. This has caused Us
great sorrow. But Our merciful God now grants the fulfillment of Our
desire. The silence, however, which until now We were constrained to
observe possessed its own consolation. For God who consoles the humble
consoled Us too by the love and enthusiasm of your religious devotion
for Us. This was a signal instance of the piety of Christian unity,
causing Us to rejoice greatly and to give thanks to God. And so as a
proof of Our love We are sending you this letter to give you additional
encouragement to observe the divine commandments and to fight bravely
the Lord's battles.

3. You know that the Apostle Peter instructed bishops in these words:
"Feed God's flock which is given to you, caring for them not under
constraint but freely for God's sake, not for the sake of base gain but
willingly, nor as lording it over the clergy but being examples to your
flock from the heart." From this you understand rightly the method of
action which is proposed for you. You also understand the virtues of
the mind which you should increasingly practice, the richer knowledge
with which you should adorn it, and the fruit of piety and love which
you should not only produce but also share with your flock. In this way
you will certainly attain the object of your ministry and be examples
to your flock from the heart. To some you will give milk, to others
meat. You will train your flock not only by teaching, but by work and
example as well, to lead a quiet life on earth in Christ Jesus. You
will lead them to obtain eternal happiness with you. For the chief of
the Apostles says: "And when the prince of shepherds appears you will
receive an imperishable crown of glory."

4. We had hoped to bring many matters to your attention but We shall
simply touch on some of them, and then deal at greater length with the
more serious questions as the need of Our sad times demands.

5. You already understand the teaching of the Apostle on the great
caution required in promoting candidates to minor and especially to
major orders. He writes to Timothy: "Lay hands on no one quickly." You
understand also the decrees of the Council of Trent on the appointment
of pastors and on the seminaries for clerics and the clarification of
these decrees by Our predecessors.

6. You know too the importance of residing personally in your diocese,
a duty to which your office strictly obliges you. This is evident from
the decrees and apostolic constitutions of many councils, and was
confirmed by the holy Council of Trent in the following words: "The
divine commandment orders everyone entrusted with the care of souls to
know their sheep and to offer sacrifice for them. They must also feed
them by preaching the divine word, by administering the sacrament, and
by setting a good example. Furthermore, they must take fatherly care of
the poor and other wretched persons and perform their other pastoral
duties. Since none of these can be accomplished by men who do not
attend their flock but abandon it as hirelings do, the holy council
warns and exhorts them to remember the divine commandments by being an
example to their flock, feeding and guiding them in justice and in
truth." Bound as We are by the obligation of this great office and
zealous as We are for the glory of God, We heartily praise those who
observe this command strictly. But We warn and exhort those who disobey
these ecclesiastical sanctions--for it is sad but not surprising that
there are some such men among the great number of bishops--to reflect
seriously that the supreme judge will demand the blood of their sheep
from their hands and judge with great strictness those who are their
leaders.

7. This fearful sentence, as you know well, does not strike only those
who do not reside in person in their diocese or seek to leave it on
every empty pretext; it includes also those who refuse without reason
to perform the task of visitation according to the prescriptions of the
canons. For they will never satisfy the requirements of the decree of
Trent unless they take care to approach their charges in person and
like a good shepherd cherish the good while they seek the strays and
lead them at last to the fold, by calling and driving some of them
strongly and others gently.

8. Bishops who do not with due concern try to obey the precepts of
residence or visitation will not avoid the fearful judgment of Our
Savior the supreme shepherd by pleading that they fulfilled their
duties through delegated ministers.

9. For care of the flock has been entrusted to themselves not to their
ministers; it was to themselves that the gifts of the Spirit were
promised. Consequently the sheep listen more gladly to the voice of
their own shepherd than to that of a representative. They seek salutary
food with more confidence from the shepherd's hand than from his
representative's, and rejoice more to obtain it. For His hand is as the
hand of the Lord, whose person is reverenced in His bishops. All this
is also amply borne out by experience, the world's instructor.

10. It would be enough to write to you on the previous topics since you
are not thankless in keeping silence about your gifts nor proud in
presuming on your merits. Certainly men who desire ardently to progress
from virtue to virtue ought to be such as We have described. Inspired
by the example of holy bishops, ancient and recent, they boast in the
Lord of smiting the Church's enemies and reforming evil morals. But
always keep in mind the golden saying of Leo the Great. "In this
struggle no victory is definitive enough to prevent the recurrence of
conflict."

11. Who can reflect without weeping on the fierce and mighty conflicts
which have raged in Our times and continue to rage almost daily against
the Catholic religion? Listen to Saint Jerome: "It is no small spark,
no small spark, I say, which is scarcely seen in being observed; it is
not a little leaven which is obviously a small thing. It is rather a
flame which attempts to devastate almost the entire world and to burn
up walls, cities, broad pastures and districts; and a leaven which
mixes with the flour and tries to destroy its whole substance." With
this reason for fear, We would lose all heart for Our apostolic service
were it not that the Guardian of Israel does not slumber or sleep, and
says to His disciples: "Behold I am with you all days even to the end
of the world," and condescends to be shepherd of shepherds as well as
guardian of the sheep.

12. But at what are these remarks aimed? A certain sect, which you
surely know, has unjustly arrogated to itself the name of philosophy,
and has aroused from the ashes the disorderly ranks of practically
every error. Under the gentle appearance of piety and liberality this
sect professes what they call tolerance or indifferentism. It preaches
that not only in civil affairs, which is not Our concern here, but also
in religion, God has given every individual a wide freedom to embrace
and adopt without danger to his salvation whatever sect or opinion
appeals to him on the basis of his private judgment. The apostle Paul
warns us against the impiety of these madmen. "I beseech you, brethren,
to behold those who create dissensions and scandals beyond the teaching
which you have learned. Keep away from such men. They do not serve
Christ Our Lord but their own belly, and by sweet speeches and
blessings they seduce the hearts of the innocent."

13. Of course this error is not new, but in Our days it rages with a
new rashness against the constancy and integrity of the Catholic faith.
Eusebius cites Rhodo as his source for saying that the heretic Apelles
in the second century had already produced the mad theory that faith
should not be investigated, but that each man should persevere in the
faith he was raised in. Even those who put faith in a crucified man
were to be saved, according to Apelles, provided that they engaged in
good works. Rhetorius too, as We learn from Saint Augustine, used to
claim that all the heretics walked on the right road and spoke truth.
But Augustine adds that this is such nonsense that he cannot believe
it. The current indifferentism has developed to the point of arguing
that everyone is on the right road. This includes not only all those
sects which though outside the Catholic Church verbally accept
revelation as a foundation, but those groups too which spurn the idea
of divine revelation and profess a pure deism or even a pure
naturalism. The indifferentism of Rhetorius seemed absurd to Saint
Augustine, and rightly so, but it did acknowledge certain limits. But a
tolerance which extends to Deism and Naturalism, which even the ancient
heretics rejected, can never be approved by anyone who uses his reason.
Nevertheless -- alas for the times; alas for this lying
philosophy!--such a tolerance is approved, defended, and praised by
these pseudo-philosophers.

14. Certainly many remarkable authors, adherents of the true
philosophy, have taken pains to attack and crush this strange view. But
the matter is so self-evident that it is superfluous to give additional
arguments. It is impossible for the most true God, who is Truth Itself,
the best, the wisest Provider, and the Rewarder of good men, to approve
all sects who profess false teachings which are often inconsistent with
one another and contradictory, and to confer eternal rewards on their
members. For we have a surer word of the prophet, and in writing to you
We speak wisdom among the perfect; not the wisdom of this world but the
wisdom of God in a mystery. By it we are taught, and by divine faith we
hold one Lord, one faith, one [10]baptism, and that no other name under
heaven is given to men except the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth in
which we must be saved. This is why we profess that there is no
salvation outside the Church.

15. But Oh! the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
How incomprehensible His judgments! God, who destroys the wisdom of the
wise, has clearly given the enemies of His Church, who despise
supernatural revelation, a perverted mind corresponding to the symbol
of iniquity which was written on the forehead of the wicked woman in
the Apocalypse. For what greater iniquity is there than for those proud
men not only to abandon true religion, but also to seek to ensnare the
imprudent by criticisms of every sort, in speech and writings filled
with all deceit! Let God arise and restrain, make futile and destroy
this unbridled license in all its manifestations.

16. Furthermore, quite apart from the flood of evil books which are
intrinsically hostile to religion, the wickedness of our enemies has
gone so far as to try to turn against religion the sacred writings
divinely given to us for the building up of religion.

17. You have noticed a society, commonly called the Bible society,
boldly spreading throughout the whole world. Rejecting the traditions
of the holy Fathers and infringing the well-known decree of the Council
of Trent, it works by every means to have the holy Bible translated, or
rather mistranslated, into the ordinary languages of every nation.
There are good reasons for fear that (as has already happened in some
of their commentaries and in other respects by a distorted
interpretation of Christ's gospel) they will produce a gospel of men,
or what is worse, a gospel of the devil!

18. To prevent this evil, Our predecessors published many
constitutions. Most recently Pius VII wrote two briefs, one to
Ignatius, [11]Archbishop of Gniezno, the other to Stanislaus,
[12]Archbishop of Mohileu, quoting carefully and wisely many passages
from the sacred writings and from the tradition to show how harmful to
faith and morals this wretched undertaking is.

19. In virtue of Our apostolic office, We too exhort you to try every
means of keeping your flock from those deadly pastures. Do everything
possible to see that the faithful observe strictly the rules of our
Congregation of the Index. Convince them that to allow holy Bibles in
the ordinary language, wholesale and without distinction, would on
account of human rashness cause more harm than good.

20. Experience also shows that this is true, and aside from other
Fathers, Saint Augustine states it in the following words: "Heresies
and other wicked teachings which ensnare souls and cast them into the
deep, arise only when the good scriptures are badly understood and when
what is not well understood in them is affirm, with daring rashness."

21. Such is the object of this society and it leaves no means untried
to achieve its objective. For it delights in printing its own
translations, as well as in dashing through every city to distribute
them itself to the common people. Indeed, to seduce the minds of the
simple, it is careful to sell them in one place, while elsewhere it
wants to give them as a gift with calculating generosity.

22. But if one wishes to search out the true source of all the evils
which We have already lamented, as well as those which We pass over for
the sake of brevity, he will surely find that from the start it has
ever been a dogged contempt for the Church's authority. The Church, as
Saint Leo the Great teaches, in well-ordered love accepts Peter in the
See of Peter, and sees and honors Peter in the person of his successor
the Roman pontiff. Peter still maintains the concern of all pastors in
guarding their flocks, and his high rank does not fail even in an
unworthy heir. In Peter then, as is aptly remarked by the same holy
Doctor, the courage of all is strengthened and the help of divine grace
is so ordered that the constancy conferred on Peter through Christ is
conferred on the apostles through Peter. It is clear that contempt of
the Church's authority is opposed to the command of Christ and
consequently opposes the apostles and their successors, the Church's
ministers who speak as their representatives. He who hears you, hears
me; and he who despises you, despises me; and the Church is the pillar
and firmament of truth, as the apostle Paul teaches. In reference to
these words Saint Augustine says: "Whoever is without the Church will
not be reckoned among the sons, and whoever does not want to have the
Church as mother will not have God as father."

23. Therefore, venerable brothers, keep all these words in mind and
often reflect on them. Teach your people great reverence for the
Church's authority which has been directly established by God. Do not
lose heart. With Saint Augustine We say that "all around us the waters
of the flood are roaring, that is, the multiplicity of conflicting
teaching. We are not in the flood but it surrounds us. We are hard
pressed but not overwhelmed, buffeted but not submerged."

24. So We urge you again not to lose heart. We are confident that you
will have the powerful support of secular princes since the question of
the Church's authority has a bearing on their own authority, as both
reason and experience prove. For Caesar can receive what is his only if
God is given what is His. As Saint Leo said, "Our duty to serve you all
will give you additional support. In difficulties, in doubts and in
every need, have recourse to this Apostolic See. For God has placed the
teaching of truth in the see of unity, as Saint Augustine says."

25. Finally, We beseech you, by the Lord's mercy. Assist Us by your
prayers to God that the Spirit of grace may abide in Us and that your
decisions may not falter. May He who has given you the desire for
agreement grant the blessing of peace to us all in general, that We may
be able all the days of Our life to serve Almighty God and hold you in
reverence and pray to the Lord with confidence: "Holy Father, preserve
them whom you have given me in your holy name."

In this confidence We impart wholeheartedly both to you and to your
flock the Apostolic blessing, pledge of Our love.

Given at Rome in Saint Mary Major's on the 5th day of May 1824, in the
first year of Our Pontificate.

