____________________

[8]Pope Gregory II Commends Boniface to the People of Thuringia, December 724

[9]Pope Gregory II Our Lord, Jesus Christ, came down from heaven and,
true God as He was, became Man, suffered and was crucified for our
sakes [80] was buried and the third day rose again from the dead and
ascended into heaven. But to His holy Apostles he said: " Go, teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and, of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost ", promising eternal life to all those who believed.

Wherefore, desiring that you should rejoice with us for all eternity
where there is no end, no suffering nor any bitterness, but only glory
for evermore, we have sent you our most holy brother Boniface as your
bishop, so that he may baptize you, teach you the faith of Christ and
lead you from error to the path of salvation, whereby you may be saved
and enjoy everlasting life. Obey him in all things, respect him as your
father and submit your hearts to his teaching, because we have sent him
to seek, not earthly gain, but the profit of your souls.

Wherefore, love God and receive Baptism in His name, because the Lord
our God had prepared what the eye of man hath not seen nor the heart
conceived for those who love Him. Put aside your evil ways and do good.
Adore not idols nor make bloody sacrifices, because God does not accept
them; but in all things carry out and observe the injunctions of our
brother Boniface, and then both you and your children will be saved for
evermore.

Build him a house, therefore, where he can dwell as your father and
bishop; build churches where you can pray: and may God have mercy on
your sins and grant you everlasting life.

