____________________

[8]Pope Clement XIII - Christianae Reipublicae - On the Dangers of
Anti-Christian Writings, 25 November 1766

1. To Our Venerable Brothers, all Patriarchs,
Primates, Metropolitans, Archbishops, and Bishops Who Enjoy Grace and
Communion with the Apostolic See.
Venerable Brothers, Greetings and
Apostolic Blessing.

The well-being of the Christian community which has been entrusted
to Us by the Prince of shepherds and the Guardian of souls requires Us
to see to it that the unaccustomed and offensive licentiousness of
books which has emerged from hiding to cause ruin and desolation does
not become more destructive as it triumphantly spreads abroad. The
distortion of this hateful error and the boldness of the enemy has so
increased, especially at this time, in sowing weeds among the wheat
either in word or in writing that unless We lay the scythe to the root
and bind up the bad plants in bundles to burn, it will not be long
before the growing thorns of evil attempt to choke the seedlings of the
Lord Sabaoth. For accursed men who have given themselves over to myths
and who do not uphold the stronghold of Sion from all sides vomit the
poison of serpents from their hearts for the ruin of the Christian
people by the contagious plague of books which almost overwhelms us.
They pollute the pure waters of belief and destroy the foundations of
religion.

They are abominable in their activity. Secretly sitting in ambush, they
draw arrows out of the quiver which they shoot at the righteous in the
dark. They have not restrained their impious minds from anything
divine, holy, and consecrated by the oldest religion of all time;
rather in their attack they have sharpened their tongues like a sword.
They have run first of all against God in their pride. Armed with a
thick neck, they have strengthened themselves against the Almighty.
They raise again from the ashes the absurdities of the impious which
have been destroyed so often. They deny God even though He makes
Himself known everywhere and comes before their eyes daily, not because
of the dullness of their mind, but only on the urging of their depraved
will. Or else they represent God Himself as lazy and indolent. They do
not respect His providence nor do they fear His justice. They preach
with a detestable and insane freedom of thought that the origin and
nature of our soul is mortal although it was created in the image of
the supreme creator little lower than the angels. Whether they think
matter has been created or foolishly imagine that it is eternal and
independent of the causes, they consider that nothing else exists in
this universe. Or else if they are forced to admit that spirit exists
with matter, they exclude the soul from the spirit's heavenly nature.
They are unwilling to understand that in this very weakness of which we
are formed something spiritual and incorruptible abides in us. By its
power we know, act, will, look to the future, attend to the present,
and remember the past.

On the other hand, there are others who, even if they judge correctly
that the fog of earthly reasonings should be dispelled and the smoke of
worldly wisdom should be driven from the eye of enlightened faith,
still dare to examine with human measures the hidden mysteries of faith
which surpass all understanding. Having become investigators of
greatness, they are not afraid of being overwhelmed by its glory. They
ridicule the faith of simple people. They lay open the mysteries of
God. They rashly discourse on questions concerning the highest matters.
The bold mind of the enquirer takes everything for itself, examines
everything, reserves nothing for faith, and deprives faith of merit by
seeking proof for it in human reason.

Should we not also be angry with those who use the most wicked
indecency of word and example to corrupt pure and strict morals by
mortal sin, who recommend to the minds of the unwary an accursed
license of living, and who cause an extreme loss of faith? Then
consider how they sprinkle their writings with a certain refined
splendor, a seductive pleasantness of speech and allurement so as to
penetrate more easily into the readers' minds and infect them more
deeply with the poison of their error. Thus they will give the snake's
poison in the cup of Babylon to the unwary who are seduced and blinded
by their smooth speech and so do not recognize the poison that kills
them. Finally, who can avoid deep sadness when he sees the bitter enemy
exceed the bounds of modesty and due respect and attack with the
publication of outrageous books now in open battle, now in dissimulated
combat the very See of Peter which the strong redeemer of Jacob has
placed as an iron column and as a bronze wall against the leaders of
darkness. Perhaps they are led on by the desperate thought that if they
shatter the head of the Church, they will be able more freely to tear
to pieces its members.

2. Therefore since the Holy Spirit has made you bishops to govern the
Church of God and has taught you concerning the unique sacrament of
human salvation, We cannot neglect our duty in the face of these evil
books. We must arouse the enthusiasm of your devotion so that you, who
are called to share in Our pastoral concern join together to oppose
this evil with all energy possible. It is necessary to fight bitterly,
as the situation requires, and to eradicate with all our strength the
deadly destruction caused by such books. The substance of the error
will never be removed unless the criminal elements of wickedness burn
in the fire and perish. Since you have been constituted stewards of the
mysteries of God and armed with His strength to destroy their defenses,
exert yourselves to keep the sheep entrusted to you and redeemed by the
blood of Christ at a safe distance from these poisoned pastures. For if
it is necessary to avoid the company of evildoers because their words
encourage impiety and their speech acts like a cancer, what desolation
the plague of their books can cause! Well and cunningly written these
books are always with us and forever within our reach. They travel with
us, stay at home with us, and enter bedrooms which would be shut to
their evil and deception.

Since you have been constituted ministers of Christ for the nations, in
order to make holy his Gospel, exert yourselves and do everything in
your power both by word and example to cut down the shoots of
falsehood. Block up the corrupt springs of vice. Sound the trumpet in
case as their leader you have to account for the souls who are lost.
Act according to the position you hold, according to the rank with
which you are vested, and according to the authority which you have
received from the Lord. In addition, as nobody could or should avoid
sharing in this sadness and insofar as there is one common reason for
everyone to grieve and to help in this great crisis of faith and
religion, call to your aid when it is necessary the time-honored piety
of Catholic leaders. Explain the cause of the Church's sorrow and
arouse its beloved sons who have always served it well on many
occasions to bring their help. Since they do not carry the sword
without cause, urge them with the united authority of state and of
priesthood, to vigorously rout those accursed men who fight against the
armies of Israel.

It is principally your duty to stand as a wall so that no foundation
can be laid other than the one that is already laid. Watch over the
most holy deposit of faith to whose protection you committed yourselves
on oath at your solemn consecration. Reveal to the faithful the wolves
which are demolishing the Lord's vineyard. They should be warned not to
allow themselves to be ensnared by the splendid writing of certain
authors in order to halt the diffusion of error by cunning and wicked
men. In a word, they should detest books which contain elements
shocking to the reader; which are contrary to faith, religion, and good
morals; and which lack an atmosphere of Christian virtue. We manifest
to you Our great happiness in this matter that most of you, following
the apostolic customs and energetically defending the laws of the
Church, have shown yourselves zealous and watchful in order to avert
this pestilence and have not allowed the simple people to sleep soundly
with serpents.

Certainly We who are distressed and distracted by Our concern for all
the churches and for the salvation of the Christian people, are
unsparing of Our efforts, and We promise you assistance too in your own
grave danger. Meanwhile, We will not cease to ask God with deep
humility to grant you help from His holy place to deflect the cunning
of the insidious enemy and to entirely fulfill the duties of your
ministry. As a pledge of the desired outcome, we lovingly impart Our
apostolic blessing to you and your flock.

Given in Rome in Saint Mary Major's on the 25th day of November in the
year 1766, the ninth year of Our pontificate.

