____________________

[8]The Credo of the People of God, by Pope Paul VI, 30 June 1968

[9]official portrait of Pope Paul VI

1. With this solemn liturgy we end
the celebration of the nineteenth centenary of the martyrdom of the
holy apostles Peter and Paul, and thus close the Year of Faith. We
dedicated it to the commemoration of the holy apostles in order that we
might give witness to our steadfast will to be faithful to the deposit
of the faith which they transmitted to us, and that we might strengthen
our desire to live by it in the historical circumstances in which the
Church finds herself in her pilgrimage in the midst of the world.

We feel it our duty to give public thanks to all who responded to our
invitation by bestowing on the Year of Faith a splendid completeness
through the deepening of their personal adhesion to the word of God,
through the renewal in various communities of the profession of faith,
and through the testimony of a Christian life. To our brothers in the
episcopate especially, and to all the faithful of the holy Catholic
Church, we express our appreciation and we grant our blessing.

Likewise, we deem that we must fulfill the mandate entrusted by Christ
to Peter, whose successor we are, the last in merit; namely, to confirm
our brothers in the faith. With the awareness, certainly, of our human
weakness, yet with all the strength impressed on our spirit by such a
command, we shall accordingly make a profession of faith, pronounce a
creed which, without being strictly speaking a dogmatic definition,
repeats in substance, with some developments called for by the
spiritual condition of our time, the creed of Nicea, the creed of the
immortal tradition of the holy Church of God.

In making this profession, we are aware of the disquiet which agitates
certain modern quarters with regard to the faith. They do not escape
the influence of a world being profoundly changed, in which so many
certainties are being disputed or discussed. We see even Catholics
allowing themselves to be seized by a kind of passion for change and
novelty. The Church, most assuredly, has always the duty to carry on
the effort to study more deeply and to present, in a manner ever better
adapted to successive generations, the unfathomable mysteries of God,
rich for all in fruits of salvation. But at the same time the greatest
care must be taken, while fulfilling the indispensable duty of
research, to do no injury to the teachings of Christian doctrine. For
that would be to give rise, as is unfortunately seen in these days, to
disturbance and perplexity in many faithful souls.

It is important in this respect to recall that, beyond scientifically
verified phenomena, the intellect which God has given us reaches that
which is, and not merely the subjective expression of the structures
and development of consciousness; and, on the other hand, that the task
of interpretation-of hermeneutics-is to try to understand and
extricate, while respecting the word expressed, the sense conveyed by a
text, and not to recreate, in some fashion, this sense in accordance
with arbitrary hypotheses.

Put above all, we place our unshakable confidence in the Holy Spirit,
the soul of the Church, and in theological faith upon which rests the
life of the Mystical Body. We know that souls await the word of the
Vicar of Christ, and we respond to that expectation with the
instructions which we regularly give. But today we are given an
opportunity to make a more solemn utterance.

On this day which is chosen to close the Year of Faith, on this feast
of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, we have wished to offer to the
living God the homage of a profession of faith. And as once at Caesarea
Philippi the apostle Peter spoke on behalf of the twelve to make a true
confession, beyond human opinions, of Christ as Son of the living Cod,
so today his humble successor, pastor of the Universal Church, raises
his voice to give, on behalf of all the People of God, a firm witness
to the divine Truth entrusted to the Church to be announced to all
nations.

We have wished our profession of faith to be to a high degree complete
and explicit, in order that it may respond in a fitting way to the need
of light felt by so many faithful souls, and by all those in the world,
to whatever spiritual family they belong, who are in search of the
Truth.

To the glory of God most holy and of our Lord Jesus Christ, trusting in
the aid of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the holy apostles Peter and
Paul, for the profit and edification of the Church, in the name of all
the pastors and all the faithful, we now pronounce this profession of
faith, in full spiritual communion with you all, beloved brothers and
sons.

We believe in one only God, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, creator of
things visible such as this world in which our transient life passes,
of things invisible such as the pure spirits which are also called
angels, and creator in each man of his spiritual and immortal soul.

We believe that this only God is absolutely one in His infinitely holy
essence as also in all His perfections, in His omnipotence, His
infinite knowledge, His providence, His will and His love. He is He who
is, as He revealed to Moses, and He is love, as the apostle John
teaches us: so that these two names, being and love, express ineffably
the same divine reality of Him who has wished to make Himself known to
us, and who, "dwelling in light inaccessible" is in Himself above every
name, above every thing and above every created intellect. God alone
can give us right and full knowledge of this reality by revealing
Himself as Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in whose eternal life we are by
grace called to share, here below in the obscurity of faith and after
death in eternal light. The mutual bonds which eternally constitute the
Three Persons, who are each one and the same divine being, are the
blessed inmost life of God thrice holy, infinitely beyond all that we
can conceive in human measure. We give thanks, however, to the divine
goodness that very many believers can testify with us before men to the
unity of God, even though they know not the mystery of the most holy
Trinity.

We believe then in the Father who eternally begets the Son, in the Son,
the Word of God, who is eternally begotten; in the Holy Spirit, the
uncreated Person who proceeds from the Father and the Son as their
eternal love. Thus in the Three Divine Persons, coaeternae sibi et
coaequales, the life and beatitude of God perfectly one superabound and
are consummated in the supreme excellence and glory proper to uncreated
being, and always "there should be venerated unity in the Trinity and
Trinity in the unity."

We believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God. He is the
Eternal Word, born of the Father before time began, and one in
substance with the Father, homoousios to Patri, and through Him all
things were made. He was incarnate of the Virgin Mary by the power of
the Holy Spirit, and was made man: equal therefore to the Father
according to His divinity, and inferior to the Father according to His
humanity; and Himself one, not by some impossible confusion of His
natures, but by the unity of His person.

He dwelt among us, full of grace and truth. He proclaimed and
established the Kingdom of God and made us know in Himself the Father.
He gave us His new commandment to love one another as He loved us. He
taught us the way of the [10]beatitudes of the Gospel: poverty in
spirit, meekness, suffering borne with patience, thirst after justice,
mercy, purity of heart, will for peace, persecution suffered for
justice sake. Under Pontius Pilate He suffered -the Lamb of God bearing
on Himself the sins of the world, and He died for us on the cross,
saving us by His redeeming blood. He was buried, and, of His own power,
rose on the third day, raising us by His resurrection to that sharing
in the divine life which is the life of grace. He ascended to heaven,
and He will come again, this time in glory, to judge the living and the
dead: each according to his merits-those who have responded to the love
and piety of God going to eternal life, those who have refused them to
the end going to the fire that is not extinguished.

And His Kingdom will have no end.

We believe in the Holy Spirit, who is Lord, and Giver of life, who is
adored and glorified together with the Father and the Son. He spoke to
us by the prophets; He was sent by Christ after His resurrection and
His ascension to the Father; He illuminates, vivifies, protects and
guides the Church; He purifies the Church's members if they do not shun
His grace. His action, which penetrates to the inmost of the soul,
enables man to respond to the call of Jesus: Be perfect as your
Heavenly Father is perfect (Mt. 5:48).

We believe that Mary is the Mother, who remained ever a Virgin, of the
Incarnate Word, our God and Savior Jesus Christ, and that by reason of
this singular election, she was, in consideration of the merits of her
Son, redeemed in a more eminent manner, preserved from all stain of
original sin and filled with the gift of grace more than all other
creatures.

Joined by a close and indissoluble bond to the Mysteries of the
Incarnation and Redemption, the Blessed Virgin, the Immaculate, was at
the end of her earthly life raised body and soul to heavenly glory and
likened to her risen Son in anticipation of the future lot of all the
just; and we believe that the Blessed Mother of God, the New Eve,
Mother of the Church, continues in heaven her maternal role with regard
to Christ's members, cooperating with the birth and growth of divine
life in the souls of the redeemed.

We believe that in Adam all have sinned, which means that the original
offense committed by him caused human nature, common to all men, to
fall to a state in which it bears the consequences of that offense, and
which is not the state in which it was at first in our first
parents-established as they were in holiness and justice, and in which
man knew neither evil nor death. It is human nature so fallen stripped
of the grace that clothed it, injured in its own natural powers and
subjected to the dominion of death, that is transmitted to all men, and
it is in this sense that every man is born in sin. We therefore hold,
with the Council of Trent, that original sin, is transmitted with human
nature, "not by imitation, but by propagation" and that it is thus
"proper to everyone."

We believe that Our Lord Jesus Christ, by the sacrifice of the cross
redeemed us from original sin and all the personal sins committed by
each one of us, so that, in accordance with the word of the apostle,
"where sin abounded grace did more abound."

We believe in one [11]Baptism instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins. [12]Baptism should be administered even to
little children who have not yet been able to be guilty of any personal
sin, in order that, though born deprived of supernatural grace, they
may be reborn "of water and the Holy Spirit" to the divine life in
Christ Jesus.

We believe in one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church built by Jesus
Christ on that rock which is Peter. She is the Mystical Body of Christ;
at the same time a visible society instituted with hierarchical organs,
and a spiritual community; the Church on earth, the pilgrim People of
God here below, and the Church filled with heavenly blessings; the germ
and the first fruits of the Kingdom of God, through which the work and
the sufferings of Redemption are continued throughout human history,
and which looks for its perfect accomplishment beyond time in glory. In
the course of time, the Lord Jesus forms His Church by means of the
sacraments emanating from His plenitude. By these she makes her members
participants in the Mystery of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, in
the grace of the Holy Spirit who gives her life and movement. She is
therefore holy, though she has sinners in her bosom, because she
herself has no other life but that of grace: it is by living by her
life that her members are sanctified; it is by removing themselves from
her life that they fall into sins and disorders that prevent the
radiation of her sanctity. This is why she suffers and does penance for
these offenses, of which she has the power to heal her children through
the blood of Christ and the gift of the Holy Spirit.

Heiress of the divine promises and daughter of Abraham according to the
Spirit, through that Israel whose scriptures she lovingly guards, and
whose patriarchs and prophets she venerates; founded upon the apostles
and handing on from century to century their ever-living word and their
powers as pastors in the successor of Peter and the bishops in
communion with him; perpetually assisted by the Holy Spirit, she has
the charge of guarding, teaching, explaining and spreading the Truth
which God revealed in a then veiled manner by the prophets, and fully
by the Lord Jesus. We believe all that is contained in the word of God
written or handed down, and that the Church proposes for belief as
divinely revealed, whether by a solemn judgment or by the ordinary and
universal magisterium. We believe in the infallibility enjoyed by the
successor of Peter when he teaches ex cathedra as pastor and teacher of
all the faithful, and which is assured also to the episcopal body when
it exercises with him the supreme magisterium.

We believe that the Church founded by Jesus Christ and for which He
prayed is indefectibly one in faith, worship and the bond of
hierarchical communion. In the bosom of this Church, the rich variety
of liturgical rites and the legitimate diversity of theological and
spiritual heritages and special disciplines, far from injuring her
unity, make it more manifest.

Recognizing also the existence, outside the organism of the Church of
Christ of numerous elements of truth and sanctification which belong to
her as her own and tend to Catholic unity, and believing in the action
of the Holy Spirit who stirs up in the heart of the disciples of Christ
love of this unity, we entertain the hope that the Christians who are
not yet in the full communion of the one only Church will one day be
reunited in one flock with one only shepherd.

We believe that the Church is necessary for salvation, because Christ,
who is the sole mediator and way of salvation, renders Himself present
for us in His body which is the Church. But the divine design of
salvation embraces all men, and those who without fault on their part
do not know the Gospel of Christ and His Church, but seek God
sincerely, and under the influence of grace endeavor to do His will as
recognized through the promptings of their conscience, they, in a
number known only to God, can obtain salvation.

We believe that the Mass, celebrated by the priest representing the
person of Christ by virtue of the power received through the Sacrament
of Orders, and offered by him in the name of Christ and the members of
His Mystical Body, is the sacrifice of Calvary rendered sacramentally
present on our altars. We believe that as the bread and wine
consecrated by the Lord at the Last Supper were changed into His body
and His blood which were to be offered for us on the cross, likewise
the bread and wine consecrated by the priest are changed into the body
and blood of Christ enthroned gloriously in heaven, and we believe that
the mysterious presence of the Lord, under what continues to appear to
our senses as before, is a true, real and substantial presence.

Christ cannot be thus present in this sacrament except by the change
into His body of the reality itself of the bread and the change into
His blood of the reality itself of the wine, leaving unchanged only the
properties of the bread and wine which our senses perceive. This
mysterious change is very appropriately called by the Church
transubstantiation. Every theological explanation which seeks some
understanding of this mystery must, in order to be in accord with
Catholic faith, maintain that in the reality itself, independently of
our mind, the bread and wine have ceased to exist after the
Consecration, so that it is the adorable body and blood of the Lord
Jesus that from then on are really before us under the sacramental
species of bread and wine, as the Lord willed it, in order to give
Himself to us as food and to associate us with the unity of His
Mystical Body.

The unique and indivisible existence of the Lord glorious in heaven is
not multiplied, but is rendered present by the sacrament in the many
places on earth where Mass is celebrated. And this existence remains
present, after the sacrifice, in the Blessed Sacrament which is, in the
tabernacle, the living heart of each of our churches. And it is our
very sweet duty to honor and adore in the blessed Host which our eyes
see, the Incarnate Word whom they cannot see, and who, without leaving
heaven, is made present before us.

We confess that the Kingdom of God begun here below in the Church of
Christ is not of this world whose form is passing, and that its proper
growth cannot be confounded with the progress of civilization, of
science or of human technology, but that it consists in an ever more
profound knowledge of the unfathomable riches of Christ, an ever
stronger hope in eternal blessings, an ever more ardent response to the
love of God, and an ever more generous bestowal of grace and holiness
among men. But it is this same love which induces the Church to concern
herself constantly about the true temporal welfare of men. Without
ceasing to recall to her children that they have not here a lasting
dwelling, she also urges them to contribute, each according to his
vocation and his means, to the welfare of their earthly city, to
promote justice, peace and brotherhood among men, to give their aid
freely to their brothers, especially to the poorest and most
unfortunate. The deep solicitude of the Church, the Spouse of Christ,
for the needs of men, for their joys and hopes, their griefs and
efforts, is therefore nothing other than her great desire to be present
to them, in order to illuminate them with the light of Christ and to
gather them all in Him, their only Savior. This solicitude can never
mean that the Church conform herself to the things of this world, or
that she lessen the ardor of her expectation of her Lord and of the
eternal Kingdom.

We believe in the life eternal. We believe that the souls of all those
who die in the grace of Christ-whether they must still be purified in
purgatory, or whether from the moment they leave their bodies Jesus
takes them to paradise as He did for the Good Thief-are the People of
God in the eternity beyond death, which will be finally conquered on
the day of the Resurrection when these souls will be reunited with
their bodies.

We believe that the multitude of those gathered around Jesus and Mary
in paradise forms the Church of Heaven, where in eternal beatitude they
see Cod as He is, and where they also, in different degrees, are
associated with the holy angels in the divine rule exercised by Christ
in glory, interceding for us and helping our weakness by their
brotherly care. We believe in the communion of all the faithful of
Christ, those who are pilgrims on earth, the dead who are attaining
their purification, and the blessed in heaven, all together forming one
Church; and we believe that in this communion the merciful love of God
and His saints is ever listening to our prayers, as Jesus told us: Ask
and you will receive. Thus it is with faith and in hope that we look
forward to the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to
come.

Blessed be God Thrice Holy. Amen.

