____________________

[9]Sermon on his Day of Ordination, by Pope Saint Leo the Great

[10][Pope Saint Leo the Great] Having been elected in absence he
returns thanks for the kindness and earnestly demands the prayers of
his church. "LET my mouth speak the praise or the Lord," and my breath
and spirit, my flesh and tongue bless His holy Name. For it is a sign,
not of a modest, but an ungrateful mind, to keep silence on the
kindnesses of GOD: and it is very meet to begin our duty as consecrated
pontiff with the sacrifices of the LORD'S praise. Because "in our
humility" the LORD "has been mindful of us" and has blessed us: because
"He alone has done great wonders for me," so that your holy affection
for me reckoned me present, though my long journey had forced me to be
absent. Therefore I give and always shall give thanks to our GOD for
all the things with which He has recompensed me. Your favourable
opinion also I acknowledge publicly, paying you the thanks I owe, and
thus showing that I understand how much respect, love and fidelity your
affectionate zeal could expend on me who long with a shepherd's anxiety
for the safety of your souls, who have passed so conscientious a
judgment on me, with absolutely no deserts of mine to guide you. I
entreat you, therefore, by the mercies of the LORD, aid with your
prayers him whom you have sought out by your solicitations that both
the Spirit of grace may abide in me and that your judgment may not
change. May He who inspired you with such unanimity of purpose,
vouchsafe to us all in common the blessing of peace: so that all the
days of my life being ready for the service of Almighty Can, and for my
duties towards you, I may with confidence entreat the LORD: "Holy
Father, keep in Thy name those whom Thou hast given me:" and while you
ever go on unto salvation, may "my soul magnify the LORD," and in the
retribution of the judgment to come may the account of my priesthood so
be rendered to the just Judge that through your good deeds you may be
my joy and my crown, who by your good will have given an earnest
testimony to me in this present life.

