____________________

[8]Inscrutabili Divinae Sapientiae - Proclaiming a Universal Jubilee, by Pope
Clement XIV, 12 December 1769

[9]Pope Clement XIV

1. To all the Faithful who read this Letter, Greetings
and Apostolic Blessing.

Since We have been elevated to the Papacy by the inscrutable counsel
of divine wisdom and goodness and by no merits of Our own, while
acknowledging the gift of God, We also fear His judgment. And so, as
often as We seriously contemplate the task entrusted to Us, We are
frightened by its gravity. Our awareness of the weakness of Our own
resources deeply disturbs Us. If We were not confident of His help, We
could lose courage altogether. Therefore, We implore the help of all
Christians in invoking God to strengthen Us, to fill Us with the
knowledge of His will, and to pour into Us the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of knowledge and holiness, and the spirit of
counsel and fortitude. Then in the midst of so many difficulties, We
may come to know what must be done, and with Our eyes ever directed to
Him, We may carry out profitably what is right. Let us beseech Him to
watch over the chosen vineyard which He has planted and to foster with
the gifts of His grace His people walking in the ways of His
commandments in this earthly pilgrimage and happily bring them to the
promised rewards of eternal life.

2. To achieve these goals, following the ancient custom of Our
predecessors, We have decided to draw from the treasury of divine
grace, whose disposal is entrusted to Our keeping, for the felicitous
inauguration of Our Pontificate. Therefore, We grant and concede to
each and all of the faithful of both sexes, wherever they may reside, a
plenary indulgence if they fulfill the usual requirements. They must
visit at least once churches designated by the Ordinaries of the places
or their Vicars or Officiales or by their authority, or, where these
are lacking, by those who exercise care of souls, after this Encyclical
has come to their notice, or any church of such nature, which has been
made the object of such visits. This must be done within the space of
fifteen continuous days or two weeks after the publication of this
designation by the Ordinaries or their Vicars or Officiales or others,
as declared above, (which weeks, We greatly hope, may fall in the
favorable time of Lent in the case of those to whom this Encyclical has
arrived in time, and there shall have devoutly prayed to God for some
period of time. They shall have fasted on Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday of either week and shall have confessed their sins and
reverently received Holy Communion on the Sunday immediately following
or any day of the same week in either of the two weeks. Finally, they
shall have given to the poor some [10]alms, as each one's devotion
suggests. Upon completion of these requirements, they receive a plenary
indulgence and remission of all their sins, as is customarily conceded
to those who visit certain churches within and without the city of Rome
in Jubilee Years. Moreover, those making journeys by sea or by land may
receive the same indulgence when they have returned to their homes
after having performed the above mentioned actions and having visited
the [11]cathedral or principal or parish church of their domicile.

3. In the case of religious men and women, even those living in
perpetual cloister, and others both laity and clergy whether in prison
or restrained by some bodily infirmity or some other impediment, who
cannot perform any or all of the above conditions, We grant that a
confessor approved before or after the publication of this Encyclical
may commute or postpone for a relative period of time their works of
piety and enjoin other works as their penitents can perform.

4. Moreover, We grant to each and all of the faithful of both sexes
both laity and clergy, whether secular or religious of any order,
congregation or institute, the permission and authority to select for
this purpose any priest as confessor, whether secular or regular of any
order or institute, from those approved before or after the publication
of this encyclical. This time only and in the forum of conscience he
may absolve and free them from excommunication, interdict suspension
and any other ecclesiastical sentence, censure and penalty either
inflicted by law or personally imposed for whatever occasion or cause.
Under the same conditions, He may also absolve them from all sins,
excesses, crimes, and delicts, however grave or enormous, even those
reserved in any way to the ordinary of the place or to Us and the
Apostolic See or otherwise reserved through Our own or former papal
constitutions, whose tenor We wish to be considered expressly. He may
also commute any vows (except those having to do with religious life
and chastity) to other pious and salutary works, having enjoined,
however, in all the above cases, a salutary penance and other acts
according to the decision of the same confessor.

5. In keeping with the intention of Our predecessors in proclaiming a
Jubilee, however, We do not intend to dispense from any public or
hidden irregularity, infamy, defect or incapacity or unsuitability,
however contracted, or to grant the faculty of dispensing, making
competent or restoring one to a former state, even in the forum of
conscience. Nor do We intend that this encyclical be used in any way on
behalf of those who have been excommunicated, suspended or interdicted
by Us or any other prelate or ecclesiastical court, unless within the
time of the Jubilee they have made satisfaction and been reconciled
with the parties involved.

6. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, on this particular
occasion and for the purpose given above We repeal all things contrary
to Our decree, even when special, specific, expressed, and individual
mention is made explicitly and not merely through general clauses
having the same meaning or where some other expression is used for this
purpose, with the understanding that We have sufficiently understood
their tenor and preserved their form. So may the holy apostles, Peter
and Paul in whose power and authority We trust intercede for you all
with the Lord.

7. Meanwhile may the almighty and merciful Lord grant you indulgence,
absolution, and remission of all your sins, time for a true and
fruitful repentance and emendation of life, the grace and consolation
of the Holy Spirit, and final perseverance in good works. Trusting in
His kindness and mercy We lovingly grant you Our apostolic blessing. We
wish, moreover, that printed copies of this encyclical, signed by
notary publics and attested by the seal of a person of ecclesiastical
dignity in all places and nations, have the same authority as the
encyclical letter itself.

Given in Rome at Saint Mary Major under the fisherman's ring, 12
December 1769, in the 1st year of Our Pontificate.

