____________________

[8]Pope Leo XII - Quo Graviora - Condemning Secret Societies, 13 March 1826

[9]anonymous 19th century painting of Pope Leo XII; swiped from
Wikimedia Commons For the perpetual remembrance of the matter.

1. Blessed Peter, Prince of Apostles, and his Successors have been
given the Power and Care of Feeding and Ruling the flock of Christ, Our
God and Savior. Hence, the more grave the evils threatening the flock,
the greater the solicitude the Roman Pontiffs ought to employ in
preventing them. For, those who have been placed in the topmost Watch
Tower of the Church can discern from afar the artifices which the
enemies of the Christian family undertake to destroy the Church of
Christ: (which they will never achieve) they can point them out and
expose them to the faithful, who may then guard against them; they can
drive away and remove them by their Authority. Our Predecessors, the
Roman Pontiffs, understanding this most Grievous Duty imposed upon
them, have unceasingly kept the watches of a good Shepherd, and by
Exhortations, Doctrines, Decrees, and by their very life given for
their sheep, have been solicitous about restraining and utterly
abolishing the sects threatening the complete ruin of the Church.
Neither is the memory of this Pontifical solicitude able to be drawn
only from the age of Ecclesiastical Annals. What things have been
carried out in our time and in the age of Our Fathers by the Roman
Pontiffs, how they opposed themselves to secret factions of men
contriving maliciously against Christ, clearly demonstrate such. For
when Clement XII, Our Predecessor, saw that the sect de` Liberi
Muratori or des Francs-Macons, or otherwise named, was increasing every
day and that they were acquiring new strength, which he knew with
certainy from many proofs to be not only suspect but even altogether
inimical to the Catholic Church, condemned it with his magnificent
Constitution, beginning with In eminenti, published on the 28th of
April 1738, the text of which is supplied:

BISHOP CLEMENT, SERVANT OF THE SERVANTS OF GOD
Health and Apostolic Benediction to all Christ's Faithful

2. "Stationed on the prominent Watch Tower, although with inferior
merits, in the disposition of Divine Mercy, in accord with the Duty of
Pastoral Providence entrusted to Us We direct with a continual zeal for
solicitude, (insofar as it is granted from on High) Our attention to
those things through which, once the access to errors and vices has
been shut off, the Integrity of Orthodox Religion may be principally
preserved, and the dangers of disturbances may be driven off from the
whole Catholic world in these most difficult times.

"To be sure, even as the very voice of the public testifies, it has
become known to Us that spreading far and wide and each day gaining
strength are some societies, assemblies, meetings, gatherings,
fellowships, or associations commonly called de` Liberi Muratori or
Francs-Macons, or identified by whatever other designation according to
the variety of idioms in which men of any religion and sect whatsoever,
satisfied by a certain feigned appearance of natural honesty, are
mutually united by a strict as well as impenetrable covenant according
to the laws and statues established by them, and which at the same time
they both secretly dedicate themselves to by a strict oath administered
on the Sacred Bible, and which under the accumulation of severe
penalties they are bound to conceal by an inviolable silence.

"But since such is the nature of a crime, that it betrays its very
self, and emits a cry as a herald of itself, on this account the
societies or associations mentioned above have impressed upon the minds
of the faithful a powerful suspicion to such an extent, that to enroll
in these same fellowships is, before prudent and likewise approved men,
absolutely the same as incurring the mark of depravity and perversion.
For if they were not acting wickedly, they would never have such great
hate for the light. Which voice has continually become more frequent,
that in many regions the above mentioned societies have appeared for a
long time to be outlawed by the secular authorities as being in adverse
to the security of the realms and providentially banned.

"Consequently, We, reflecting upon the most serious damages, which
generally are inflicted not only on the tranquillity of the temporal
State, but also on the spiritual health of souls from societies and
associations of this kind, and for this reason, at least, in order to
be in harmony with both civil and Canonical Sanctions, We, as Commander
of the family of the Lord after the manner of the faithful and prudent
Servant, ought to teach with Divine Eloquence by day and night, that a
vigil must be kept lest the class of men of this type as thieves break
into the house, and lest, in Truth, like foxes strive to destroy the
vineyard, they corrupt the hearts of the simple ones, and shoot the
innocent ones with arrows in hidden ways. In order to obstruct the
broadest path which could possibly be opened to accomplish with
impunity their wickedness, and from other just and reasonable causes
known to Us, We have established and Decreed, that from the counsel of
several of Our Brother [10]Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, and
especially by Our own motion aand from the fullness of Apostolic Power,
those same societies, assemblies, meetings, gatherings, fellowships, or
associations commonly called de` Liberi Muratori or Francs-Macons, or
called by any other name whatever, must be condemned and prohibited, as
by Our present Constitution, perpetually valid, We condemn and prohibit
them.

"Wherefore, We admonish severely and in Virtue of Holy Obedience each
and every faithful of Jesus Christ, of any state, grade, condition,
order, dignity, and pre-eminence whatever, be it laity, or Clerics,
both secular and regular, likewise those worthy of specific and
individual mention and expression, that anyone under whatever pretext
or special condition may not dare or presume to enter or to propagate,
or foster, and thus to receive and hide them in their dwellings or
homes or anywhere else, the aforementioned societies de` Liberi
Muratori or Francs-Macons, or otherwise named, to be enrolled in, to
adhere to, or to take part in them, or to give opportunity or
convenience that may allow them to convene in any place, to furnish
them with anything, or otherwise offer counsel, aid or good will,
openly or secretly, directly or indirectly, per se or through others in
any way whatever. Likewise no one may dare or presume to exhort,
induce, provoke, or persuade others to be inscribed in, to be reckoned
as part of or be among these societies of whatever kind, or to help and
support them in any way whatever. On the contrary, they are by all
means obliged to abstain totally from those very societies, assembles,
meetings, gatherings, fellowships, or associations under pain of
excommunication to be incurred ipso facto without any declaration by
all those offending as above, from which no one is able to obtain the
favor of [11]absolution except through Us, or the Roman Pontiff
reigning at the particular time, save one who has been determined to be
at the point of death.

"Moreover, We Ordain and Mandate, that as well the Bishops and
Prelates, Superiors and other Ordinaries of places, as the Inquisitors
Deputed for the places of heretical perversity wherever, proceed and
search for grounds of accusation against transgressors, of whatever
grade, state, condition, order, dignity, or pre-eminence they may be,
and punish with fitting penalties and confine those strongly suspected
of heresy; for We grant and impart to them, in general, and to each of
them unrestricted faculty of going out and searching for grounds
against, and of restraining and punishing with suitable punishments,
those same transgressors, once the aid of the secular arm also has been
called upon for this purpose, if there should be need.

"On the other hand, We Ordain, that absolutely the same faith which
would be applied to the Original Letter, if they would be produced or
shown, be applied to duplicates, likewise to printed copies, of the
present letter signed by the hand of some public notary, and secured by
the seal of a person constituted in Ecclesiastical Dignity.

"It is allowed to no man to falsify this Letter of Our Declaration,
Condemnation, Mandate, Prohibition and Interdict, or to oppose it by a
rash boldness; but if anyone presumes to attempt this, let him know
that he will incur the wrath of Almighty God, and of His Blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul.

"Given at Rome at Saint Mary Major in the 1738th year of the
Incarnation of the Lord on the 28th day of April, in the eighth year of
Our Pontificate."

3. Nevertheless, these things were not enough for Benedict XIV Our
Predecessor of celebrated memory. For it had become spread abroad by
the discussions of so many that the penalty of Excommunication demanded
in the Letter of Clement, having died a short while ago, had already
lost its strength, because Benedict had not clearly confirmed that
Letter. It was truly absurd to maintain that the Laws of previous
Pontiffs become obsolete, if they are not confirmed expressly by one's
Successors, and futhermore, it was manifestly evident that the
Constitution of Clement had been considered as Valid by Benedict.
Nevertheless, Benedict has judged that this sophistry had to be torn
away from the hands of sectarians by a new Constitution which was
published, the beginning of which was Providas, on the 18th of March in
the year 1751, by which Benedict confirmed the Constitution with just
as many words, given to in forma specifica, which is held as the
strongest and most effective of all. In fact the Constitution of
Benedict is as follows:

BISHOP BENEDICT, SERVANT OF THE SERVANTS OF GOD

4. "We reckon that the Providential Laws and Sanctions of the Roman
Pontiffs, Our Predecessors, not only those whose force We fear can be
weakened or extinguished either by a failing of the times or by the
neglect of men, but also those which maintain their initial force and
full strength, must be strengthened and confirmed by a new buttressing
of Our Authority when just and weighty reasons demand it.

"Reasonably, Our Predecessor of happy memory, Pope Clement XII, by his
Apostolic Letter in the 1738th year of the Incarnation of the Lord, on
the 28th day of April, given in the 8th year of his Pontificate, and
written to all of Christ's Faithful, the beginning of which is In
eminenti, has forever condemned and prohibited several societies,
assemblies, meetings, gatherings, fellowships, or associations commonly
called de` Liberi Muratori or Francs-Macons, or identified by whatever
other designation, having been dispersed widely then in certain
regions, and each day becoming more powerful, admonishing each and
every one of Chris's faithful, under pain of excommunication ipso facto
without any declaration needing to be incurred, from which no one would
be able to be absolved by any other than the Roman Pontiff then
Reigning, unless on the point of death, so that anyone might nor dare
or presume to enter or propagate, or to foster, receive, conceal
societies of this kind, to be inscribed in, attached to or be among
them or otherwise involved according as it is contained more broadly
and richly in the same Letter, the text of which is above.

"Since, however, as We have learned, there have been some who have not
hesitated to declare and to boast openly that the stated penalty of
excommunication imposed by Our Predecessor, as is shown above, no
longer carries any force, because of the fact that the very
Constitution before introduced has not been confirmed by Us, as if in
fact, express confirmation of a Pontifical Successor were required for
the continuation of Apostolic Constitions published by a Predecessor.

"And since it has also been recommended to Us by some Pious and
God-fearing men that it would be exceedingly expedient for destroying
all the deceptions of the calumniators, and for making public the
uniformity of Our disposition with the mind and will of the same
Predecessor, to add the fresh voice of Our Confirmation to the
Constitution of the above mentioned Predecessor.

"Although, while We have hitherto willingly granted, not only on
numerous occasions formerly, but also especially within the year of
jubilee having now passed, to many of Christ's faithful truly repenting
and lamenting for having violated the laws of the same Constitution,
and willingly professing that they will withdraw entirely from the
condemned societies or associations of this kind and that they are in
the future never going to return to those societies and those
associations, or while We have communicated to the penitentiaries
appointed by Us the faculty of being capable of imparting, in Our name
and by Our Authority, to those types of penitents, who have recourse to
them, the same [12]absolution, also, while We have not neglected with a
restless zeal for vigilance to insist earnestly that action be taken by
competent Judges and Tribunals against the violators of that very
Constitution according to the measure of the crime, which action in
fact was often taken, We have given indeed not merely probable
arguments, but clearly evident and certain arguments, from which Our
disposition and steadfast and deliberate will in regard to the force
and continuance of the censures imposed by Clement, Our said
Predecessor, as is shown above, ought clearly enough to be concluded.
But if any contrary opinion was passed around on Our account, We would
be able to ddisregard it in all security, and to abandon our cause to
the just judgment of the Ominpotent God, using those words, which it is
certain had at one time been recited in the Sacred Liturgy: `Grant, We
beseech Thee, O Lord, that we do not trouble ourselves about the
contradiction of spurious minds, but once that very wickedness has been
spurned let us pray that you suffer us neither to be frightened by the
unjust criticisms, nor to be attracted to the insidious flatteries, but
rather to love that which Thou dost command:-` as is found in the
ancient Missal, which is attributed to Saint Gelasius, and was
published by the Vernerable Servant of God, Joseph Maria [13]Cardinal
Thomasius, in the Mass, which is entitled Contra obloquentes.

"Nevertheless, so that it might not be able to be said that something,
by which We could easily be able to take away kindling and shut the
mouth of false accusations, had been unguardedly neglected by Us, once
that the Counsel of several of Our Venerable Brothers, [14]Cardinals of
the Holy Roman Church had earlier been heard. We decided to confirm
with this presnt Letter, in forma specifica, that same Constitution of
Our Predecessor inserted above word for word, which is considered the
strongest and most effective, accordingly. From certain knowledge and
the fullness of Our Apostolic Authority, We confirm, strengthen, renew,
that Constitution by the text of this present Letter in all things and
on account of all things just as if It had been published firstly by
Our own motion, by Our Authority and in Our name, and We will and
Decree that it have perpetual force and efficacy.

"Furthermore, among the gravest causes of the aforementioned
prohibition and condemnation reported in the Constitution inserted
above, the first is that in societies and associations of this type men
of any religion and sect whatever are united with each other, from
which matter it is evident enough how great a destruction is able to be
brought to the purity of the Catholic Religion. The next is the strict
and impenetrable pledge of a secret, by which those things which are
done in associations of such like are hidden, to which, therefore, that
sentence is able fittingly to be applied which Caecilius Natalis cited
before Municius Felix in an indisputably diverse case: Honest things
always rejoice in the public, crimes are secret. The third is the oath
by which they bind themselves for preserving inviolably this type of
secret, as if it were allowed to someone to protect himself under cover
of a promise or swearing, having been questioned by legitimate power,
without being held to confess all things,whatsoever things are sought
after for discerning whether something is done in meetings of this
kind,which is contrary to the welfare and Laws of the State and
Religion. The fourth is, that societies of this kind are known to be
against Canonical not less than civil sanctions, since, namely, all
colleges and sodalities united contrary to public authority are
forbidden, as is to be seen in Book XLVII of the Pandects, tit. 22 de
collegiis ac corporibus illicitis, and in the renowned letter of C.
Plinius Caecilius Secundus, which is XCVII, lib. X, in which he says
that by his own edict in accord with the decrees of the emperor it has
been forbidden that there be, (heretical sects) that is, that societies
and assemblies are not able to be entered or established without the
authority of the prince. The fifth is, that already in many regions the
previously mentioned societies and fellowships have been proscribed by
the laws of secular princes, and eliminated. The last, finally, that
before prudent and approved men the same societies and fellowships were
being perceived in an evil light and by their judgment whoever would
enroll in the same would incur the mark of depravity and perversion.

"Finally, the same Predecessor in the Constitution inserted above
rouses the Bishops and superior Prelates, and other Ordinaries of
places, that they do not neglect to invoke the help of the secular
branches, if there be need, for the execution of it.

"Which things, each and every, are not only approved and confirmed by
Us and are commended and enjoined to the same Ecclesiastical Superiors
respectively, but also We Ourselves, in accord with the Duty of the
Apostolic Vigilance, invoke with this Letter the strength and aid of
the Catholic Princes and of all the secular powers as to the
accomplishment of the matters presented above, and We demand with
earnest desire, since the same Supreme Princes and Powers have been
chosen by God as the Defenders of the Faith and Protectors of the
Church, and therefore it is their Duty to accomplish by every suitable
means, that obedience due to the Apostolic Constitutions and
consideration of every kind be rendered, which for them the Fathers of
the Council of Trent, sess. 25 cap. 20, and much before, the Emperor
Charles the Great had made exceedingly clear in tit. I, cap. 2 of his
Capitularies, where after the observance of Ecclesiastical Sanctions
committed to all those subject to him, he added: `For in no way are we
able to understand how they can be faithful to us, who have shown
themselves unfaithful to God and disobedient to their Priests.'
Wherefore, enjoining all the rulers and ministers of his domains, that
they should by all means constrain each and every one to offer the
obedience due to the Laws of the Church, and also imposed the gravest
penalties against those who neglect to render this, supplying among
other things: `But whoever will have been found in these things (that
it be absent!) at least neglecting and disobeying them, let them know
that neither do they retain any honors inour empire, although they will
have even been our sons, nor a place in our palace, neither do they
have either any association or communication with us, but rather let
them undergo penalties in difficulty and dryness.'

"We will, however, that absolutely the same faith which would be
applied to the original Letters, if it would be produced or shown, be
applied to duplicates, likewise to printed copies, of the present
letter signed by the hand of some public notary, and secured by the
seal of a person constituted in Ecclesiastical Dignity.

"It is allowed to no man to falsify this letter of Our confirmation,
renewal, approbation, commission, invocation, the demand of Our Decree
and will, or to oppose it by a rash boldness. But if anyone presumes to
attempt this, let him know that he will incur the wrath of Almighty
God, and of His Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

"Given at Rome in Saint Mary Major, in the 1751st year of the
Incarnation of the Lord, on the 18th day of March, in the 11th year of
Our Pontificate."

5. Would that those who were in charge of matters then had assumed
these Decrees to be of such value as the salvation of both the Church
and the State was demanding! Would that they had convinced themselves
that they ought to respect in the Roman Pintiffs, Successors of Blessed
Peter, not only the Universal Pastors and Teachers of the Church, but
also the Vigorous Defenders of their Dignity, and the most diligent
heralds of the dangers which threaten! Would that they had used that
power of theirs for dismembering the sects whose pernicious devices had
been exposed to them by the Apostolic See! Already from that time they
had plainly put into effect their cause. And because they judged that
this cause was needing to be treated with indifference or at least
treated very trivially, whether by the deceit of the sectarians
cunningly hiding their affairs, whether by the imprudent counsels of
some, from those old Masonic sects which have never languished, very
many others have arisen much more dangerous and more audacious than the
former.

The sect of the [15]Carbonari, which was considered the leader of all
the others in Italy and in some other regions, was considerd to embrace
as if in its bosom all these, and having divided into, as it were,
various branches diverse in name only, undertook to fight most
vehemently against the Catholic Religion and every topmost legitimate
civil power. Which being a disaster, so that he might free Italy and
other regions, indeed even the very Pontifical Domain. (into which,
because the Pontifical Government had been obstructed for so long a
time, tha sect had insinuated itself) Pius VII of happy memory, in
whose place We have been chosen, condemned with the gravest penalties
the sect of the [16]Carbonari, or with the passage of time by whatever
other name it might be called according to the diversity of places, of
idioms and of men, by a Constitution published on the 13th of September
in the year 1821 whose beginning is: Ecclesiam a Jesu Christo. We deem
that the Original of this must also be inserted in Our Letter.

BISHOP PIUS, SERVANT OF THE SERVANTS OF GOD
For the perpetual remembrance of the matter.

6. "The Church founded by Jesus Christ Our Savior upon a firm Rock, and
against which Christ Himself has prommised that the gates of hell will
never prevail, has been so often assaulted, and by such dreadful
enemies, that unless that Divine and Unchangeable Promise had
intervened, it might seem that it must be feared that the Church
itself, besieged be it by their power, their crafts, or their cunning,
might entirely perish. But that which has happened in previous
times,such also has been done and especially in this certainly
sorrowful time of ours, which seems to be that end time foretold by the
Apostles so long ago, during which time (Jude v. 18.) mockers will come
walking according to their own desires in ungodliness. For It is not
concealed from anyone how great the multitude of wicked men will have
joined together in these most difficult times against the Lord and
against His Anointed One, who are especially solicitous, once the
faithful have been ensnared by Philosophy and vain deceit (Col 2:8.)
and torn away from the Doctrine of the Church, for weakening and
overturning the same Church, although by a useless effort. But in order
to succeed more easily, the greater number of them have formed secret
groups and clandestine sects, from which they were hoping that they
might induce many into the fellowship of their conspiracy and crime.

"A long time ago this Holy See, once these sects had been discovered,
cried with a great and unbridled Voice against them, and exposed their
plans, which had been devised secretly by them against Religion, indeed
against civil society. Long ago it called forth the attentiveness of
all, that they might beware lest it be allowed to these sects to
attempt that which they were heinously contemplating. Indeed it must
have grieved these endeavors of the Holy See not to have answered that
destruction, which It was observing, and that wicked men had not
desisted from their acknowledged plan; whence they at long last
attained to those evils which We Ourselves have perceived; indeed, men
whose arrogance has always mounted, have dared to begin new secret
societies.

"Mention must be made in this place of a society, recently born and
propagated far and wide in Italy and in other regions, which although
it has been divided into several sects, and according to their variety
it sometimes assumes names among themselves different and distinct,
nevertheless because the entity is a communion of opinions and crimes,
and because a certain pact has been entered into, is one, and is
generally accustomed to go under the name of the [17]Carbonari.

Indeed, they simulate a singular respect and a certain extraordinary
zeal toward the Catholic Religion and toward the Person and Doctrine of
Jesus Christ Our Savior, Whom at times they also impiously dare to call
the Rector and great Teacher of this society. But these ways of
speaking, which are seen to be more slippery than oil, are nothing
other than darts employed by crafty men, who come in sheep's clothing
but are ravenous wolves inside, for more securely wounding the too
little cautious.

"Surely that most severe oath, by which, imitating for the most part
the ancient Priscillianists they promise that they at no time ever, or
in no case, either are going to expose to men not enrolled in the
society anything which regards the society, or are going to share with
those who are in the lower degrees anything which pertains to the
higher decrees. In addition, those clandestine and furthermore
illegitimate assemblies, which they have, after the manner employed by
many heretics, and the selection of men of whatever religion and sect
into their society, even if other things were not available,
sufficiently convince that it is necessary to have no confidence in
their related discourses.

"But it is not necessary by conjectures and indications, that it be
judged such concerning their sayings, as it was pointed out above.
Books published by these very types in which the procedure is
described, which is accustomed to be used in the meetings, especially
of the higher degrees; their catechisms, statutes, and other authentic
and credible documents, and in fact the testimony of those who, when
they had abandoned that society to which they had previously adhered,
revealed its errors and frauds to Legitimate Judges, have declared
openly, that the [18]Carbonari particularly incline in such a way that
they give to each one great license for devising by his own genius and
from his own ideas for himself a religion which he may practice, once
indifference to religion has been introduced, than which hardly
anything more destructive can be contrived, such that they profane and
defile the passion of Jesus Christ by certain of their impious
ceremonies, that they despise the Sacraments of the Church (for which
they seem to substitute other new things invented by themselves through
their supreme wickedness) and despise the very mysteries of the
Catholic Religion and that they overthrow this Apostolic See against
which, because on it the Sovereignty of the Apostlic Chair has always
flourished, (S. Aug. Epist. 43.) they are roused by a certain
unparalleled hate and they devise every dangerous destructive plot.

"And the precepts concerning morals, which the society of the
[19]Carbonari hand on, are not, as it is certain from their monuments,
less wicked, although it boasts confidently that it demands from its
own followers, that they cultivate and exercise charity and every kind
of virtue, and abstain from every vice. Therefore, it promotes sensual
pleasure most shamlessly, it teaches that it is licit to kill those who
have not kept the trust offered concerning the secret, which was
mentioned above; and although Peter, the Prince of the Apostles,
Decrees, that Christians (1 Pet. 2:13.) be subject to every human
creature on account of God, whether to the king as pre-eminent, whether
to the magistrates as ambassadors to them, etc., and although Paul the
Apostle (Tit. 3:1.) commands that every soul be subject to Higher
Powers: nevertheless that society teaches that it is allowed, once
revolts have been provoked, to deprive of their power kings and other
rulers, whom most unjustly it dares indiscriminately to call tyrants.

"These and other dogmas and precepts of this society are the ones from
which those crimes newly committed by the [20]Carbonari have emerged,
which have brought such intense grief to honest and pious men. We,
therefore, who have been constituted as the Guardian of the House of
Israel, which is Holy Church, and who in accord with Our Pastoral
Office ought to beware lest the Lord's flock divinely entrusted to Us
suffer any harm, consider in a case so serious that We cannot abstain
from repressing the filthy undertakings of men. We are also moved by
the example of Clement XII and Benedict XIV, our Predecessors of happy
memory, of whom the one on the 28th day of April of the year 1738 by
the Constitution In Eminenti, the other on the 18th day of March 1751
by the Constitution Providas, have condemned and proscribed the
societies de` Liberi Muratori, or Francs-Macons, or called by whatever
other name according to the variety of regions and idioms, of which
societies the society of the [21]Carbonari, must be considered perhaps
the offspring or certainly the imitation. And although We have already
gravely prohibited this society with two Edicts published through Our
Secretary of State; nevertheless, following Our above mentioned
Predecessors, We think that severe penalties must be Decreed with a
formality indeed more Solemnly against this society, especially since
the [22]Carbonari indiscriminately maintain that they are not included
in those two Constitutions of Clement XII and Benedict XIV, and that
they are not subject to the judgments and penalties proposed in them.

"Therefore, now that the select Congregation of Our Venerable Brothers
of the [23]Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church has been heard, indeed
from its Counsel, and also by Our own motion and from Our certain
knowledge and mature deliberation, indeed from the fullness of Our
Apostolic Power, We have Decreed and Ordained that the society of the
[24]Carbonari mentioned above, or called by any other name whatever,
its assemblies, meetings, gatherings, fellowships, or associations must
be condemned and prohibited, accordingly as We condemn and proscribe by
Our present Constitution forever Valid.

"Wherefore We Order strictly and in Virtue of Holy Obedience each and
every faithful of Chhrist of whatever state, grade, condition, order,
dignity and pre-eminence, be they the laity or Clerics, both Seculars
and Regulars and even those worthy of specific and individual mention,
that anyone under whatever pretext, or special condition not dare or
presume to join or propagate, to foster, the society of the
[25]Carbonari mentioned above, or otherwise named, and to admit and
hide in their dwellings, or their homes, or any other place, to be
enrolled in, to adhere to or to take part in it, indeed whatever degree
of it, or to give opportunity or convenience that it may be convened in
any place, to furnish it with anything, or otherwise to offer counsel,
aid or good will, openly or in secret, directly or indirectly, per se
or through others in any way whatever. Likewise no one may dare or
presume to exhort, induce, provoke or persuade others to be inscribed
in, be reckoned as part of or be among a society of this kind, or any
degree of it, nor are they to help and thus support it in any way
whatever. On the contrary they must absolutely abstain themselves from
the same society and its assemblies, meetings, fellowships, or
associations under pain of Excommunication needing to be incurred ipso
facto without any declaration by all those offending as above, from
which no one is able to obtain the favor of Absolutiion through anyone
except Us, or the Roman Pontiff Reigning at that time, save one
determined to be at the point of death.

"Futhermore We Order all under the same pain of Excommunication
reserved to Us and Our Successors, the Roman Pontiffs, that they are
held to declare to the Bishops, or to others whom it pertains all those
whom they know to have joined in this society or to have defiled
themselves by any one of the crimes mentiond above.

"Finally, that every danger of error may efficaciously be prevented, We
condemn and We proscribe that all, as they call them, catechisms and
books of the [26]Carbonari, and We forbid, under the same pain of Major
Excommunication reserved in the same way, every one of the faithful to
read or to possess the books mentioned above, and We command that they
hand over those materials, either to the Ordinaries, or to others, to
whom the right of receiving them pertains.

"We Will, however, that absolutely the same Faith which would be
applied to the Original Letter, if they would be produced or shown, is
to be applied to duplicates, likewise printed copies, of the present
Letter signed by the hand of some public notary, and secured by the
seal of a person Constituted in Ecclesiastical Dignity.

"It is allowed to no man to falsify this Letter of Our Declaration,
Condemnation, Mandate, Prohibition and Interdict, or ot oppose it by a
rash boldness; but if anyone presumes to attempt this, let him know
that he will incur the wrath of Almighty God, and of His Blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul.

"Given at Rome in Saint Mary Major, in the 1821st year of the
Incarnation of the Lord, on the 13th day of September, in the
twenty-second year of Our Pontificate."

7. Not long after the Constitution published by Pius VII, We were
elevated to the topmost Chair of Blessed Peter by no merits of Ours;
and immediately We turned Our attention to exposing what the state of
clandestine sects was, what their number was, what their poser was.
Inquiring about these things We easily understood that their arrogance
had grown principally on account of the multitude of them, increased by
the new sects. From which sects that one must especially be mentioned
which is called Universitaria, because it has a seat and domicile in
many universities of learning, in which the young are informed,
initiated to, and fashioned for every crime by some teachers, who are
zealous not to teach them, but to pervert them by the mysteries of the
same sect which ought to be called most truly the mysteries of inquity.

From this it indeed appears that even after so long a time since the
flames of revolution were enkindled and spread abroad, indeed after the
remarkable victories reported by the powerful Princes of Europe, by
which those flames were expected to be extinguished, their wicked
undertakings still have not known an end. For in these very regions in
which the early storms seem to have quieted, what fear there is of new
distrubances and seditions, which those sects continually devise! Such
dread of the impious daggers, which they secretly fix in the bodies of
those whom they assign to death! How many and how grave the things,
even against their will, are they who rule with power over the same
ones not rarely forced to decree for safeguarding public peace?

From this the most painful calamities come forth by which the Church is
everywhere fiercely plagued, and which We are not able to relate
without pain, without deep sorrow. Its Holy Dogmas and Precepts are
fought against most shamelessly; Its Dignity is diminished; and that
peace and happiness which It ought to enjoy by a certain right of Its
own, was not only being disturbed, but is totally destroyed.

Nor must it be thought that all these evils, and others which have been
omitted by Us are attributed to these clandestine sects surely through
calumny. Books which they do not hesitate to write about Religion and
the State, have been published in their name, with which they scorn
dominion, blaspheme majesty; moreover they declare repeatedly that
Christ is either a scandal or foolish; indeed, not rarely, that there
is no God, and they teach that the soul of man dies together with the
body: the codes and statues, by which they explain their goals and
ordinances openly declare that all the things which We have already
mentioned, and which pertain to the overthrowing of Legitimate Rulers
and totally destroying the Church come forth from them. And this has
been ascertained and must be considered as certain, that these sects,
although in name different, nevertheless have been joined among
themselves by an impious bond of filthy goals.

Since matters are in such a state, We judge it to be the Character of
our Office to Condemn these clandestine sects again, and in such a
manner indeed that no one of them can boast that they are not
encompassed by Our Apostolic Pronouncement, and under this pretext lead
careless and less sagacious men into error. Therefore, from the Counsel
of Our Venerable Brethren, the [27]Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church,
and also by Our own motion indeed with Our certain knowledge and mature
consideration, We forbid forever under the same penalties which are
contained in the Letters of Our Predecessors already reported in this
Our Contitution, which Letters We expressly confirm, that all secret
societies, those which now are and those which perhaps will afterwards
sprout out, and which propose to themselves against the Church and
against the highest civil powers those things which We have mentioned
above, by whatever name they may finally be called.

Wherefore We Order strictly and in virtue of Holy Obedience each and
every faithful of Christ of whatever state, grade, condition, order,
dignity and pre-eminence, be they the laity or Clerics, both Seculars
and Regulars and even those worthy of specific and individual mention,
that anyone, under whatever pretext or special condition, may not dare
or presume to join or propagate, or to foster, the societies mentioned
above, or by whatever name they may be called, and to admit and hide,
in their dwellings, or their homes, or any place, to be enrolled in, to
adhere to or to take part in them, indeed to whatever degree of the
same, or to give opportunity or convenience that they may be assembled
in any place, to furnish the same with anything, or otherwise to offer
counsel, aid or good will, openly or in secret, directly or indirectly,
per se or through others in any way whatever. Likewise no one may dare
or presume to exhort, induce, provoke or persuade others to be
inscribed in, be reckoned as part of or be among societies of this
kind, or any degree of the same, nor are they to help and thus support
them in any way whatever. On the contrary they must absolutely abstain
from the same societies and their assemblies, meetings, fellowships, or
associations under pain of Excommunication to be incurred ipso facto
without any declaration by all those offending as above, from which no
one is able to obtain the favor of [28]absolution through anyone except
Us, or the Roman Pontiff Reigning at that time, save one determined to
be at the point of death.

Furthermore We order all under the same pain of Excommunication
reserved to Us and Our Successors, the Roman Pontiffs, that they are
held to declare to the Bishops, or to others whom it concerns, all
those whom they know to have joined this society, or to have defiled
themselves by any one of the crimes just mentioned above.

In fact, We explicitly condemn and declare invalid particularly that
clearly impious and accursed oath, by which they bind those who are
received into these sects that they will reveal to none those things
which pertain to those sects, and that they will strike with death all
those members who expose those things to their superiors, either
Ecclesiastics or laity. For what reason? Is not an oath, which must be
sworn in justice, in order to establish, as it were, a contract by
which someone obliges himself to an unjust murder, and in order to
despise the Authority of those, who, when they regulate either the
Church or Legitimate civil society, have the right of discerning those
things in which the salvation of those societies consists, contrary to
Divine Law? Isn't it the most unjust and the greatest indignity to call
God as a witness and surety of crimes? Most recently the Fathers of the
Lateran Council III have said (Can. 3): "For they must not be called
oaths, but rather perjuries, which are taken against Ecclesiastical
utility and the Ordinances of the most Holy Fathers." And the
shamelssness and madness of the ones among these men who when they say
not just in their heart, but also openly and in their public writings:
"There is not a God," dare nevertheless demand an oath from all those
whom they select for their sects.

These things have been established for suppressing and condemning all
these ravening and criminal sects. But now We not only request but
demand your service, Venerable Brothers, the Catholic Patriarchs,
Primates, Archbishops, and Bishops. Be attentive for yourselves and for
the Universal flock over which the Holy Ghost has placed you as Bishops
to Rule the Church of God. Devouring wolves indeed will seize upon you
not sparing the flock: but do not fear, not consider your life more
precious than yourselves. Maintain that Sacred Truth that the constancy
of the men entrusted to you in Religion depends for the most part on
you and on things done rightly. For although we may live in those days
which are evil, and in that time in which many do not maintain sound
Doctrine, nevertheless the Obedience of very many faithful to their
Pastors endures, whom they receive with reason as Ministers of Christ
and dispensers of His mysteries. Use, therefore, this Authority for the
advantage of your sheep, which you maintain over their souls by an
imperishable Honor of God. Make known through yourselves the deceits of
the sects and with how much diligence they must guard against them and
their social intercourse. Let them dread their perverse doctrine which
mocks the Most Holy Mysteries of our Religion and the most pure
Precepts of Christ, and which attacks every Legitimate Power, while you
act as their models and teachers. And finally let Us exhort you with
the words of Our Predecessor, Clement XII, in his Encyclical Letter to
all the Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops of the Catholic
Church of the 14th day of September of the year 1758: "Let Us be
filled, I pray, with the Power of the Spirit of the Lord, with
discernment and with virtue, lest just as dumb dogs not having the
power to bark, We suffer Our flocks to be as pillage and Our sheep
forage for the beasts of the field. And let not anything detain Us from
giving ourselves up to all battles for the Glory of God and the
salvation of souls. Let Us consider Him, who underwent such great
contradiction against Himself by sinners. But if We fear the boldness
of those wicked ones, it has been from the force of the Episcopate, and
from the sublime and Divine Power of Governing the Church; but neither
are We able to remain much longer or be any longer Christians, if it
has come to this point that We are terrified at the threats or the
artifices of the destroyers."

We demand also with great zeal your assistance, dearest sons in Christ,
Our Catholic Princes, whom We love with a singular and truly Paternal
love. Furthermore We call into memory the words which Leo the Great,
whose Successors in Dignity and Heirs We are, although unworthy of the
name, used writing to the emperor Leo: "You ought unhesitatingly to
recognize that the Royal Power has been conferred to you not only for
the Rule of the world, but especially for the defense of the Church, so
that by suppressing the heinous undertakings you may defend those
Statutes which are good and restore True Peace to those things which
have been disordered." Although there is such an interval, the reality
remains in this time, so that those sects must be restrained by you not
only for defending the Catholic Religion, but also for protecting your
safety and that of the people subject to your Rule. In fact, the cause
of Religion especially in this time, has been so united with the health
of society, that certainly in no way can one be separated from the
other. For they who follow those sects, are not less enemies of
Religion than of your Power. They assault each one, they devise to
overthrow completely each one. But they would not however be allowed,
if it were possible, to suppress either Religion or any Royal Power.

And so great is the cunning of the most calculating men that when they
are seen especially to be favorable to the increasing of your Power,
then they are looking chiefly for the overturning of it. Those men
indeed teach very many things such that they advocate that Our Power
and that of the Bishops must be diminished and weakened by those who
have possession of power, and that many rights must be transferred to
them, both from those which are Possessions of this Apostolic See and
Principal Church, and from those which pertain to the Bishops, who have
been called for a sharing of Our solicitude. But these things those men
teach, not only from a most offensive hate by which they are inflamed
against Religion, but also according to a plan whereby they hope that
people who are subject to your Rule on observing that the limits, which
Christ and the Church instituted by Him have established concerning
Sacred Matters, are overturned, may be easily aroused by this example
to change and destroy even the form of civil government.

Likewise We look with solicitude, by Our Special Prayer and
encouragements, upon you all, O Beloved Sons, who profess the Catholic
Religion. Avoid entirely men who consider light darkness, and darkness
light. For what utility worthy of the name can arise from agreement
with men who think that no consideration for God, no consideration for
the more Sublime Powers, is needing to be had, who through intrigues
and secret assemblies try to declare war on those things, and who are
such that they cry even in public and everywhere that they are the
greatest lovers of the public gook, of the Church, and of society;
nevertheless they have already declared by all their deeds that they
wish to throw all things into disorder and to overturn all things.
These are indeed similar to those men to whom John commands in his
second Epistle (v. 10) that neither hospitality must be given no "God
speed" be said, and whom our Fathers do not hesitate to call the
firstborn of the devil. Beware therefore of their flatteries and of
their discourses sweetened with honey, by which they will seduce you to
enroll in those sects to which they have been admitted. Have it for
certain that no one can be a member of those sects, without being
guilty of the most serious disgraceful act; and drive away from your
ears the words of those who vigorously declare that you may assent to
your election to the lower degrees of their sects, that nothing is
admitted in those degrees which is opposed to reason, nothing which is
opposed to Religion, indeed that there is nothing proclaiimed, nothing
performed which is not Holy, which is not Right, which is not
Undefiled. Truly that abominable oath, which has already been
mentioned, and which must be sworn even in that lower echelon, is
sufficient for you to understand that it is contrary to Divine Law to
be enlisted in those lower degrees, and to remain in them. In the next
place, although they are not accustomed to commit those things which
are more serious and more criminal to those who have not attained to
the higher degrees, nevertheless it is plainly evident that the force
and boldness of those most pernicious societies grow on account of the
unanimity and the multitude of all who enroll in them. Therefore, even
those who have not passed beyond the inferior degrees, must be
considered sharers of their crimes. And that passage of the Apostle to
the Romans (ch. 1) applies to them: "They who do such things, but also
those who consent to those doing them."

Finally, We call very lovingly to Ourselves those who had once been
enlightened, and had tasted the Heavenly Gift and had been made
partakers, nevertheless, then erred most miserably and follow those
sects whether they are engaged in their inferior or abide in their
superior degrees. For, the one standing in the place of Him Who has
professed that He has not come to call the just but sinners, and Who
has likened Himself to a Shepherd, Who, when He has left the remaining
flock behind, carefully seeks the sheep He has lost, We exhort and
implore them to turn back to Christ. For although they have defiled
themselves exceedingly with crime, they ought not despair of Mercy and
Clemency from God and Jesus Christ Who has suffered for them also, Who
will not despise in any way their repentance, but certainly like a most
loving Father, who a long time ago was waiting for his prodigal sons,
will very gladly receive it. But We, in order that We may rouse them,
inasmuch as it is in Our Power, and pave an easier road for them to
penance, suspend for the entire interval of a year, once this Apostolic
Letter of Ours has been published in the region in which they live,
both the obligation of denouncing their associates in those sects, and
also the reservation of censures, into which they, enrolling in those
sects, have fallen, and We declare that, even if their associates have
not been denounced, they are able to be absolved from those censures by
any confessor whatever, provided that he is from the number of those
who have been approved by the Ordinaries of the places in which they
live.

Which Indulgence also We Authorize to be applied to those who perhaps
live at Rome. But if anyone of them whom We address is so unyielding
(because God the Father of Mercies turns away) that he acts such that
that interval of time, which We have designated, passes without
abandoning those sects, and being truly repentant, by that lapse of
time immediately both the obligation of denouncing his associates and
the reservation of censures revives for him, nor is he able to obtain
[29]absolution thereafter, unless once his associates have been
denounced before, or at least once an oath has been sworn with respect
to denouncing them as soon as possible. Nor is he able to be loosed
from those censures by any other than Us, or by Our Successors, or by
those who will have obtained the faculty of absolving from the same by
the Holy See.

We will, however, that absolutely the same Faith which would be applied
to the Original Letter, if they would be produced or shown, is to be
applied to duplicates, likewise printed copies, of the present Letter
signed by the hand of some public notary, and secured by the Seal of a
person constituted in Ecclesiastical Dignity.

It is allowed to no man to falsify this Letter of Our Declaration,
condemnations, renewal, ordered prohibition, invocation, examination,
decree and will, or to oppose it by a rash boldness. But if anyone
presumes to attempt this, let him know that he will incur the wrath of
Almighty God, and of His Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome in Saint Peter, in the 1826th year of the Incarnation of
the Lord, on the 13th day of March, in the second year of Our
Pontificate.

