____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 13 January 2010 - The Mendicant
Orders

At the beginning of the New Year let us look at the history of
Christianity, to see how history develops and how it can be renewed. It
shows that saints, guided by God's light, are the authentic reformers
of the life of the Church and of society. As teachers with their words
and witnesses with their example, they can encourage a stable and
profound ecclesial renewal because they themselves are profoundly
renewed, they are in touch with the real newness: God's presence in the
world. This comforting reality namely, that in every generation saints
are born and bring the creativity of renewal constantly accompanies the
Church's history in the midst of the sorrows and negative aspects she
encounters on her path. Indeed, century after century, we also see the
birth of forces of reform and renewal, because God's newness is
inexhaustible and provides ever new strength to forge ahead. This also
happened in the 13th century with the birth and the extraordinary
development of the Mendicant Orders: an important model of renewal in a
new historical epoch. They were given this name because of their
characteristic feature of "begging", in other words humbly turning to
the people for financial support in order to live their vow of poverty
and carry out their evangelizing mission. The best known and most
important of the Mendicant Orders that came into being in this period
are the Friars Minor and the Friars Preachers, known as Franciscans and
Dominicans. Thus they are called by the names of their Founders,
respectively Francis of Assisi and Dominic de Guzm√°n. These two great
saints were able to read "the signs of the times" intelligently,
perceiving the challenges that the Church of their time would be
obliged to face.

A first challenge was the expansion of various groups and movements of
the faithful who, in spite of being inspired by a legitimate desire for
authentic Christian life often set themselves outside ecclesial
communion. They were profoundly adverse to the rich and beautiful
Church which had developed precisely with the flourishing of
monasticism. In recent Catecheses I have reflected on the monastic
community of Cluny, which had always attracted young people, therefore
vital forces, as well as property and riches. Thus, at the first stage,
logically, a Church developed whose wealth was in property and also in
buildings. The idea that Christ came down to earth poor and that the
true Church must be the very Church of the poor clashed with this
Church. The desire for true Christian authenticity was thus in contrast
to the reality of the empirical Church. These were the so-called
paupers' movements of the Middle Ages. They fiercely contested the way
of life of the priests and monks of the time, accused of betraying the
Gospel and of not practising poverty like the early Christians, and
these movements countered the Bishops' ministry with their own
"parallel hierarchy". Furthermore, to justify their decisions, they
disseminated doctrine incompatible with the Catholic faith. For
example, the Cathars' or Albigensians' movement reproposed ancient
heresies such as the debasement of and contempt for the material world
the opposition to wealth soon became opposition to material reality as
such, the denial of free will and, subsequently, dualism, the existence
of a second principle of evil equivalent to God. These movements gained
ground, especially in France and Italy, not only because of their solid
organization but also because they were denouncing a real disorder in
the Church, caused by the far from exemplary behaviour of some members
of the clergy.

Both Franciscans and Dominicans, following in their Founders'
footsteps, showed on the contrary that it was possible to live
evangelical poverty, the truth of the Gospel as such, without being
separated from the Church. They showed that the Church remains the
true, authentic home of the Gospel and of Scripture. Indeed, Dominic
and Francis drew the power of their witness precisely from close
communion with the Church and the Papacy. With an entirely original
decision in the history of consecrated life the Members of these Orders
not only gave up their personal possessions, as monks had done since
antiquity, but even did not want their land or goods to be made over to
their communities. By so doing they meant to bear witness to an
extremely modest life, to show solidarity to the poor and to trust in
Providence alone, to live by Providence every day, trustingly placing
themselves in God's hands. This personal and community style of the
Mendicant Orders, together with total adherence to the teaching and
authority of the Church, was deeply appreciated by the Pontiffs of the
time, such as Innocent III and Honorious III, who gave their full
support to the new ecclesial experiences, recognizing in them the voice
of the Spirit. And results were not lacking: the groups of paupers that
had separated from the Church returned to ecclesial communion or were
gradually reduced until they disappeared. Today too, although we live
in a society in which "having" often prevails over "being", we are very
sensitive to the examples of poverty and solidarity that believers
offer by their courageous decisions. Today too, similar projects are
not lacking: the movements, which truly stem from the newness of the
Gospel and live it with radicalism in this day and age, placing
themselves in God's hands to serve their neighbour. As Paul VI recalled
in Evangelii Nuntiandi, the world listens willingly to teachers when
they are also witnesses. This is a lesson never to be forgotten in the
task of spreading the Gospel: to be a mirror reflecting divine love,
one must first live what one proclaims.

The Franciscans and Dominicans were not only witnesses but also
teachers. In fact, another widespread need in their time was for
religious instruction. Many of the lay faithful who dwelled in the
rapidly expanding cities, wanted to live an intensely spiritual
Christian life. They therefore sought to deepen their knowledge of the
faith and to be guided in the demanding but exciting path of holiness.
The Mendicant Orders were felicitously able to meet this need too: the
proclamation of the Gospel in simplicity and with its depth and
grandeur was an aim, perhaps the principal aim, of this movement.
Indeed, they devoted themselves with great zeal to preaching. Great
throngs of the faithful, often true and proper crowds, would gather to
listen to the preachers in the churches and in the open air; let us
think, for example, of Saint Anthony. The preachers addressed topics
close to people's lives, especially the practice of the theological and
moral virtues, with practical examples that were easy to understand.
They also taught ways to cultivate a life of prayer and devotion. For
example, the Franciscans spread far and wide the devotion to the
humanity of Christ, with the commitment to imitate the Lord. Thus it is
hardly surprising that many of the faithful, men and women, chose to be
accompanied on their Christian journey by Franciscan or Dominican
Friars, who were much sought after and esteemed spiritual directors and
confessors. In this way associations of lay faithful came into being,
which drew inspiration from the spirituality of Saint Francis and Saint
Dominic as it was adapted to their way of living. In other words, the
proposal of a "lay holiness" won many people over. As the Second
Ecumenical Vatican Council recalled, the call to holiness is not
reserved to the few but is universal (cf. Lumen Gentium, n. 40). In all
the states of life, in accordance with the demands of each one of them
a possibility of living the Gospel may be found. In our day too, each
and every Christian must strive for the "high standard of Christian
living", whatever the class to which he or she belongs!

The importance of the Mendicant Orders thus grew so vigorously in the
Middle Ages that secular institutions, such as the labour
organizations, the ancient gilds and the civil authorities themselves,
often had recourse to the spiritual counselling of Members of these
Orders in order to draw up their regulations and, at times, to settle
both internal and external conflicts. The Franciscans and Dominicans
became the spiritual animators of the medieval city. With deep insight
they put into practice a pastoral strategy suited to the social
changes. Since many people were moving from the countryside to the
cities, they no longer built their convents in rural districts but
rather in urban zones. Furthermore, to carry out their activities for
the benefit of souls they had to keep abreast of pastoral needs. With
another entirely innovative decision, the Mendicant Orders relinquished
their principle of stability, a classical principle of ancient
monasticism, opting for a different approach. Friars Minor and
Preachers travelled with missionary zeal from one place to another.
Consequently they organized themselves differently in comparison with
the majority of monastic Orders. Instead of the traditional autonomy
that every monastery enjoyed, they gave greater importance to the Order
as such and to the Superior General, as well as to the structure of the
Provinces. Thus the Mendicants were more available to the needs of the
universal Church. Their flexibility enabled them to send out the most
suitable friars on specific missions and the Mendicant Orders reached
North Africa, the Middle East and Northern Europe. With this
adaptability, their missionary dynamism was renewed.

The cultural transformations taking place in that period constituted
another great challenge. New issues enlivened the discussion in the
universities that came into being at the end of the 12th century.
Minors and Preachers did not hesitate to take on this commitment. As
students and professors they entered the most famous universities of
the time, set up study centres, produced texts of great value, gave
life to true and proper schools of thought, were protagonists of
scholastic theology in its best period and had an important effect on
the development of thought. The greatest thinkers, Saint Thomas Aquinas
and Saint Bonaventure, were Mendicants who worked precisely with this
dynamism of the new evangelization which also renewed the courage of
thought, of the dialogue between reason and faith. Today too a "charity
of and in the truth" exists, an "intellectual charity" that must be
exercised to enlighten minds and to combine faith with culture. The
dedication of the Franciscans and Dominicans in the medieval
universities is an invitation, dear faithful, to make ourselves present
in the places where knowledge is tempered so as to focus the light of
the Gospel, with respect and conviction, on the fundamental questions
that concern Man, his dignity and his eternal destiny. Thinking of the
role of the Franciscans and the Dominicans in the Middle Ages, of the
spiritual renewal they inspired and of the breath of new life they
communicated in the world, a monk said: "At that time the world was
ageing. Two Orders were born in the Church whose youth they renewed
like that of an eagle" (Burchard of Ursperg, Chronicon).

Dear brothers and sisters, at the very beginning of this year let us
invoke the Holy Spirit, the eternal youth of the Church: may he make
each one aware of the urgent need to offer a consistent and courageous
Gospel witness so that there may always be saints who make the Church
resplendent, like a bride, ever pure and beautiful, without spot or
wrinkle, who can attract the world irresistibly to Christ and to his
salvation.

