____________________

[9]Pope Francis - Regina Caeli address, 1 April 2013

1. Dear Brothers and Sisters,

Happy Easter to you all! Thank you for coming today, in such large
numbers, to share the joy of Easter, the central mystery of our faith.
Let us pray that the power of the Resurrection of Christ might reach
everyone - especially those who suffer - and every place that is in
need of trust and hope.

Christ has conquered evil fully and finally, but it is up to us, to
people in every age, to embrace this victory in our lives and in the
realities of history and society. For this reason it seems important to
point out that today we ask God in the liturgy: "O God, who give
constant increase to your Church by new offspring, grant that your
servants may hold fast in their lives to the Sacrament they have
received in faith" (Collect for Monday in the Octave of Easter).

Indeed, the Baptism that makes us children of God, and the Eucharist
that unites us to Christ, must become life. That is to say: they must
be reflected in attitudes, behaviour, actions and choices. The grace
contained in the Sacraments Easter is an enormous source of strength
for renewal in personal and family life, as well as for social
relations.

Nevertheless, everything passes through the human heart: if I allow
myself to be reached by the grace of the risen Christ, if I let that
grace change for the better whatever is not good in me, [to change
whatever] might do harm to me and to others, then I allow the victory
of Christ to affirm itself in in my life, to broaden its beneficial
action. This is the power of grace! Without grace we can do nothing -
without grace we can do nothing! And with the grace of Baptism and Holy
Communion can become an instrument of God's mercy - that beautiful
mercy of God.

To express in our lives the sacrament we have received: behold, dear
brothers and sisters, our daily work - and, I would say, our daily joy!
The joy of being instruments of the grace of Christ, as branches of the
vine which is Christ himself, inspired by the sustaining presence of
His Spirit! We pray together, in the name of the dead and risen Lord,
and through the intercession of Mary Most Holy, that the Paschal
mystery might work deeply in us and in our time, in order that hatred
give way to love, lies to the truth, revenge to forgiveness, sadness to
joy.

