____________________

[8]Pope Gregory XVI - Quas Vestro - On Mixed Marriages, 30 April 1841

[9]Pope Gregory XVI To the Prelates of Hungary. Venerable Brothers,
Greetings and Apostolic Blessing.

1. The letter from you and the bishops of your country which Joseph,
the bishop of Csamad delivered has caused Us both sorrow and joy. Since
We must diligently safeguard the integrity of sound doctrine and
practice, We cannot help but be displeased with whatever might imperil
them. And yet what the church has always thought about marriages
between Catholics and non-Catholics is more than abundantly clear.
Indeed she has always considered such marriages to be illicit and
destructive both because of the disgraceful sharing in sacramental
matters involved and because of the ever present danger of the Catholic
spouse and improper upbringing of offspring. And this is the tenor of
most ancient canons severely prohibiting such marriages and more recent
sanctions of supreme pontiffs. What Benedict XIV says about such
marriages in his encyclical to the bishops of Poland and in his well
known work, de Synodo dioecesana, is more than sufficient. If, indeed,
in certain places, because of difficulties of place and conditions,
such marriages are tolerated, the reason is surely a sort of
moderation. It is in no way to be considered approbation or approval,
but merely a toleration, brought about not willingly but by necessity
to avoid greater evils. The letter of Pius VII to the [10]archbishop of
[11]Mainz, on [12]9 October 1803, in response to the bishops of
Wroclaw, Roznava, and Spis, wisely states this. Moreover, if this
Apostolic See, mitigating to some extent the full letter of the canons,
has, on occasion, allowed such mixed marriages, it has done so only in
serious cases and reluctantly. Moreover, it has done so only when
precautions are taken to prevent the perversion of the Catholic spouse
by the non-Catholic party. Also the Catholic party realized an
obligation to work for the conversion of the other party; the Catholic
party also realized that all offspring from such marriages be educated
only in the sanctity of the Catholic religion. Such precautions are
surely founded on divine law, against which, without any doubt, one
seriously sins who rashly exposes himself or herself and future
offspring to the danger of perversion.

2. Thus, from your letter We learn that in your dioceses an abuse has
become common: namely, that marriages between Catholics and
non-Catholics, without any previous dispensation from the Church and
without necessary precautions, are dignified with priestly blessing and
sacramental rites. It must be clear to you how deeply We are affected
by this, especially since We perceive that once this license with
regard to mixed marriages was introduced, it became widely
disseminated. This in turn resulted in a rapidly spreading deadly
indifference toward religion in your great kingdom, once so preeminent
in the glory of the Catholic faith. Let us not be mistaken: We would
scarcely have overlooked this practice if it had been known to Us
earlier. This was the reason for Our silence. In the past the Apostolic
See granted no dispensation whatsoever for entering such mixed
marriages without the necessary preliminary conditions and without the
customary regulations.

3. Nevertheless, it is no small consolation that at the same time as We
were informed of this growing evil, We have likewise learned of your
efforts and those of your colleagues to remedy it opportunely. We are
joyful to learn with what zeal you are jointly inflamed to preserve
intact the purity of the Catholic faith and with what reverence and
devotion you support the Apostolic See, the leader and teacher of
truth, which entrusted the exercise of the pastoral office to you. For
when you realized that this practice, which had grown strong, was
totally adverse to the laws and principles of the Church and therefore
could no longer be tolerated without grave danger, you did not hesitate
to insist on its removal and were fully prepared, if necessary, to
endure danger for the sake of your eternal salvation and that of your
flock. And completing Our joy are the abundant fruits which have
emanated from your concern. Nor are we ignorant of how your pastors and
other clergy have faithfully complied with your orders so that this
illegitimate custom has been suppressed in many places out of regard
for the ancient discipline of the sacred canons. And so we congratulate
you all the more, venerable brothers, and render thanks to God who has
endowed you with courage for the protection of the faith and its sacred
teaching. We do not desist from exhorting you to continue to espouse
the cause of the Church lest this evil usage ever revive, and that if
any traces of it remain, it be totally eradicated.

4. Meanwhile We have not failed to pay careful attention to your letter
in which you point out that sometimes a Catholic, despite his pastor's
persuasion and exhortation to the contrary, persists in the intention
of undertaking such a mixed marriage without the necessary precautions.
You suggest that if the matter cannot be prevented without greater
danger to the Catholic religion, the pastor be present at the marriage
in a passive fashion only, abstaining completely from all religious
rites and any other sign of approval. By way of precaution, you decided
that such a serious matter should be brought to Our attention at once,
in order to secure Our assent. And, indeed, We, who otherwise are
intent on properly preserving intact the most holy doctrines and
practices of the Catholic Church, will aid you in view of the
calamitous circumstances of your region and the difficulties for you
arising from them, by approving of the arrangement undertaken by your
counsel and by agreeing that your petition should be conceded.

5. We do this in keeping with what We permitted some time ago,
following the example of Our predecessors, with regard to regions of
other countries and with regard to what Pius VI declared on several
occasions for one of the dioceses of Hungary itself. In a reply from
Vienna to the bishop of Spis in 1782, which was repeated the following
year after his return to Rome and in 1795 to that bishop's successor,
he, in accord with the circumstances of the time, explained as follows:
"Whatever be the laws regarding the matter, the bishop and pastors
ought to see that marriages of this nature not take place. But if they
do, all offspring should be educated in the Catholic faith. If these
marriages do take place, they must always abstain from granting the
nuptial blessing. Their presence, if necessity urges it, must be merely
physical and not be joined with words or actions which would encourage
or approve of the offspring being allowed to be raised other than in
the Catholic religion."

6. Sometimes because of conditions of time, person, or place, the
marriage of a non-Catholic to a Catholic without the precautions
prescribed by the Church cannot be prevented without danger of greater
evil or scandal to the detriment of religion. Pius VII in the
above-mentioned letter to the [13]archbishop of [14]Mainz judged that
it can tend to the benefit of the Church and the common good if
marriages of this nature, although forbidden and illicit, be celebrated
before a Catholic pastor rather than before a heretical minister to
whom the parties could easily have recourse. On such occasions the
Catholic pastor, or any other priest with his delegation, can be
present at these marriages in a merely physical manner, without benefit
of any sort of ecclesiastical rite. He could act merely as a qualified,
as they say, or authorizing, witness; having heard the consent of both
spouses, he may afterwards in accord with his office enter the act as
valid in the matrimonial records.

7. Nevertheless, in these circumstances, as Our same predecessor aptly
commends, bishops and pastors must zealously take precautions that the
danger of perversion on the part of the Catholic party, as far as
possible, be removed; that care be taken for the education of offspring
of both sexes in the Catholic religion; and that the Catholic spouse be
seriously admonished of the obligation by which he is bound to procure,
as best as he can, the conversion of the non-Catholic spouse, which
will be the best means for more easily obtaining pardon from God for
the sins he has committed.

8. We grieve that this type of toleration is necessary in a kingdom so
outstanding in the profession of the Catholic faith. We are compelled
to this expedient to prevent more serious damage to the Catholic
Church. Therefore, We beseech you and all your colleagues that in such
a serious matter, having first implored that inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, you strive to carry out what you truly judge to correspond to
this end. Also see that such toleration towards mixed marriages does
not extinguish the memory of the canons execrating such marriages as
well as of the constant care of the Church to prevent her children from
entering into such marriages to the loss of their souls. It will be
your task and that of your fellow bishops and pastors in educating
these faithful either privately or publicly to zealously recount the
teaching and laws pertaining to such marriages and to enjoin their
strict observance. In the assurance that you will carry out all these
instructions because of your proven observation, faith, and reverence
for this chair of blessed Peter, We lovingly impart as a guarantee of
heavenly aid and witness of Our paternal affection the apostolic
blessing to you and all your colleagues to be communicated to the
proper flocks of each.

Given in Rome at Saint Peter's under the fisherman's ring on 30 April
1841, in the eleventh year of Our Pontificate.

