____________________

[8]Pope Saint Pius V - Quo Primum - Promulgating the Tridentine Liturgy, 14
July 1570

1. From the very first, upon Our elevation to the
cheif Apostleship, We gladly turned our mind and energies and directed
all out thoughts to those matters which concerned the preservation of a
pure liturgy, and We strove with God's help, by every means in our
power, to accomplish this purpose. For, besides other decrees of the
sacred Council of Trent, there were stipulations for Us to revise and
re-edit the sacred books: the Catechism, the Missal and the Breviary.
With the Catechism published for the instruction of the faithful, by
God's help, and the Breviary thoroughly revised for the worthy praise
of God, in order that the Missal and Breviary may be in perfect
harmony, as fitting and proper - for its most becoming that there be in
the Church only one appropriate manner of reciting the Psalms and only
one rite for the celebration of Mass - We deemed it necessary to give
our immediate attention to what still remained to be done, viz, the
re-editing of the Missal as soon as possible.

Hence, We decided to entrust this work to learned men of our selection.
They very carefully collated all their work with the ancient codices in
Our Vatican Library and with reliable, preserved or emended codices
from elsewhere. Besides this, these men consulted the works of ancient
and approved authors concerning the same sacred rites; and thus they
have restored the Missal itself to the original form and rite of the
holy Fathers. When this work has been gone over numerous times and
further emended, after serious study and reflection, We commanded that
the finished product be printed and published as soon as possible, so
that all might enjoy the fruits of this labor; and thus, priests would
know which prayers to use and which rites and ceremonies they were
required to observe from now on in the celebration of Masses.

Let all everywhere adopt and observe what has been handed down by the
Holy Roman Church, the Mother and Teacher of the other churches, and
let Masses not be sung or read according to any other formula than that
of this Missal published by Us.

This ordinance applies henceforth, now, and forever, throughout all the
provinces of the Christian world, to all patriarchs, [10]cathedral
churches, collegiate and parish churches, be they secular or religious,
both of men and of women - even of military orders - and of churches or
chapels without a specific congregation in which conventual Masses are
sung aloud in choir or read privately in accord with the rites and
customs of the Roman Church. This Missal is to be used by all churches,
even by those which in their authorization are made exempt, whether by
Apostolic indult, custom, or privilege, or even if by oath or official
confirmation of the Holy See, or have their rights and faculties
guarenteed to them by any other manner whatsoever.

This new rite alone is to be used unless approval of the practice of
saying Mass differently was given at the very time of the institution
and confirmation of the church by Apostolic See at least 200 years ago,
or unless there has prevailed a custom of a similar kind which has been
continuously followed for a period of not less than 200 years, in which
most cases We in no wise rescind their above-mentioned prerogative or
custom. However, if this Missal, which we have seen fit to publish, be
more agreeable to these latter, We grant them permission to celebrate
Mass according to its rite, provided they have the consent of their
bishop or prelate or of their whole Chapter, everything else to the
contrary notwithstanding.

All other of the churches referred to above, however, are hereby denied
the use of other missals, which are to be discontinued entirely and
absolutely; whereas, by this present Constitution, which will be valid
henceforth, now, and forever, We order and enjoin that nothing must be
added to Our recently published Missal, nothing omitted from it, nor
anything whatsoever be changed within it under the penalty of Our
displeasure.

We specifically command each and every patriarch, administrator, and
all other persons or whatever ecclesiastical dignity they may be, be
they even [11]cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, or possessed of any
other rank or pre-eminence, and We order them in virtue of holy
obedience to chant or to read the Mass according to the rite and manner
and norm herewith laid down by Us and, hereafter, to discontinue and
completely discard all other rubrics and rites of other missals,
however ancient, which they have customarily followed; and they must
not in celebrating Mass presume to introduce any ceremonies or recite
any prayers other than those contained in this Missal.

Furthermore, by these presents [this law], in virtue of Our Apostolic
authority, We grant and concede in perpetuity that, for the chanting or
reading of the Mass in any church whatsoever, this Missal is hereafter
to be followed absolutely, without any scruple of conscience or fear of
incurring any penalty, judgment, or censure, and may freely and
lawfully be used. Nor are superiors, administrators, canons, chaplains,
and other secular priests, or religious, of whatever title designated,
obliged to celebrate the Mass otherwise than as enjoined by Us. We
likewise declare and ordain that no one whosoever is forced or coerced
to alter this Missal, and that this present document cannot be revoked
or modified, but remain always valid and retain its full force
notwithstanding the previous constitutions and decrees of the Holy See,
as well as any general or special constitutions or edicts of provincial
or synodal councils, and notwithstanding the practice and custom of the
aforesaid churches, established by long and immemorial prescription -
except, however, if more than two hundred years' standing.

It is Our will, therefore, and by the same authority, We decree that,
after We publish this constitution and the edition of the Missal, the
priests of the Roman Curia are, after thirty days, obliged to chant or
read the Mass according to it; all others south of the Alps, after
three months; and those beyond the Alps either within six months or
whenever the Missal is available for sale. Wherefore, in order that the
Missal be preserved incorrupt throughout the whole world and kept free
of flaws and errors, the penalty for nonobservance for printers,
whether mediately or immediately subject to Our dominion, and that of
the Holy Roman Church, will be the forfeiting of their books and a fine
of one hundred gold ducats, payable ipso facto to the Apostolic
Treasury. Further, as for those located in other parts of the world,
the penalty is excommunication latae sententiae, and such other
penalties as may in Our judgment be imposed; and We decree by this law
that they must not dare or presume either to print or to publish or to
sell, or in any way to accept books of this nature without Our approval
and consent, or without the express consent of the Apostolic
Commissaries of those places, who will be appointed by Us. Said printer
must receive a standard Missal and agree faithfully with it and in no
wise vary from the Roman Missal of the large type (secundum magnum
impressionem).

Accordingly, since it would be difficult for this present pronouncement
to be sent to all parts of the Christian world and simultaneously come
to light everywhere, We direct that it be, as usual, posted and
published at the doors of the Basilica of the Prince of the Apostles,
also at the Apostolic Chancery, and on the street at Campo Flora;
furthermore, We direct that printed copies of this same edict signed by
a notary public and made official by an ecclesiastical dignitary
possess the same indubitable validity everywhere and in every nation,
as if Our manuscript were shown there. Therefore, no one whosoever is
permitted to alter this notice of Our permission, statute, ordinance,
command, precept, grant, indult, declaration, will, decree, and
prohibition. Should know that he will incur the wrath of Almighty God
and of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Saint Peter's in the year of the Lord's Incarnation, 1570, on
the 14th of July of the Fifth year of Our Pontificate.

