____________________

[8]Pope Pius VI - Inscrutabile - On the Problems of the Pontificate, 25
December 1775

[9]Pope Pius VI To the Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops and Bishops of
the Entire Catholic Church. Venerable Brothers, We give you Greeting
and Our Apostolic Blessing.

1. The mysterious design of divine wisdom, whose works are always
marvelous, did not despise Our lowliness but willed instead to make Us
the head of the bishops and to honor Us as the guide of His entire
Church. Just as He chose the young David from among a thousand and
raised him from herding sheep to rule His people on a glorious throne,
and make them acceptable to God by means of the rod of guidance, so He
chose Us. Others seemed more worthy of the papal tiara, especially
since We had just been appointed to the college of [10]cardinals and
occupied the last place there.

As We gratefully reflect on His infinite kindness towards Us, We cannot
refrain from tears at His beneficent mercy and omnipotence in
conferring His graces so generously on one who was not recommended by
his own merits. Despite Our lack of strength and merit, He established
Us as leader of the peoples in order that, as representative on earth
of the Eternal Shepherd, We should feed Israel, His inheritance, and
lead it to the holy mountain of Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem.

Since it is most fitting for Us to show Our obedience and devotion as
consecrated Pope by offering praise to the Lord, We cannot stifle Our
exclamations of exultation as We praise Him and cry with the prophet:
"Let Our mouth speak the praise of the Lord and Our soul, spirit, flesh
and tongue bless His holy name." "But if it is religious conduct to
rejoice at a grace, it is also necessary to be anxious about deserving
it. For what is so fearful as toil to the weak, height to the lowly and
rank to one who does not deserve it?"

2. Who would not be fearful at the present condition of the Christian
people? The divine love by which we abide in God and God in us grows
very cold as sins and wickedness increase every day. Who would not be
shocked when considering that We have undertaken the task of guarding
and protecting the Church at a time when many plots are laid against
orthodox religion, when the safe guidance of the sacred canons is
rashly despised, and when confusion is spread wide by men maddened by a
monstrous desire of innovation, who attack the very bases of rational
nature and attempt to overthrow them? Assuredly "with such reason for
fear, we would have no hope of escaping slavery except that the
Guardian of Israel, who does not sleep, says to His disciples: `Behold
I am with you all days even to the consummation of the world.' He
deigned to be not merely the guardian of the sheep, but the shepherd of
the shepherds as well."

3. Now since divine graces descend on us most generously when Our
prayer ascends to God, We make this special request of you, Our helpers
and advisers, in this Our first address to you, for the love by which
we are one in the Lord and for the faith by which we grow into one
body. Beseech God every day to strengthen Us by His power and to pour
out on Us the Spirit of counsel and of courage, in order that We may
both decide what measures We should take in these difficult
circumstances and that We may have the strength to carry through Our
decisions. Therefore pray in the Spirit, and let your prayer be the
surest proof of your love for Us and your brotherly union. Invoke the
merits of the most holy Mary, mother of God, Our special patroness, and
of all the heavenly court, that We may quickly obtain the help We need.
Request for Us especially the protection and defense of Saint Peter the
Apostle. "We rejoice more to serve his See than to occupy it, in the
hope that his prayers will make the God of mercies regard the time of
Our ministry with kindness and deign to guard and feed the shepherd of
his sheep."

4. We urge you to show that you are faithful stewards of the mysteries
of God. As the Lord is your portion, you know well what you should do
and endure for the Church of God in the courageous fulfillment of your
ministry. So We exhort you to rouse up the grace which is in you
through the imposition of hands and to omit nothing which contributes
to the growth of the body "which is built from Christ and joined
together at every point of subministration" in faith and in love.

Therefore, since you know that the Church's chief good derives from
admitting only those who are fully qualified into the clergy, We do not
have to remind you to observe carefully the sanctions established in
this matter by the canons. Prevent from entering the Church's service
all who lack exceptional moral holiness, who are uninstructed in the
law of the Lord, and who give little or no promise of becoming
energetic members of the clergy. For instead of proving helpers to you
in feeding and guiding your flock, they will increase your toil and
troubles. They will hinder you from ensuring that the Lord receives
from his workers the fruits of the vineyard which Christ in strictest
justice will expect from you at the final judgment. A man who is going
to be a priest should excel in holiness and learning. For God rejects
as priests those who have rejected knowledge, and only the man who
unites moral piety with the pursuit of knowledge can be a suitable
worker in the Lord's harvest. Since this cannot occur without careful
education, it has been decreed accordingly that each diocese should
establish a college for clerics in accordance with its means; if such a
college already exists, it should be carefully preserved. For how would
young men, whose age impels them down the easy path, persevere in
ecclesiastical training or make such progress in humane and sacred
studies unless they were instructed in piety and religion from their
early years and practiced in the interpretation of literature?

Such colleges have been established and carefully equipped with
suitable regulations and even greatly expanded in individual dioceses
as Benedict XIV recommended to each of you as an indispensable part of
your office. So just as We must praise the outstanding labor and
concern shown in founding and expanding these colleges, We must also
urge on strongly those in whose diocese a college has not been
established or completed.

5. For the same reason you should undoubtedly always give special
attention to the beauty of the house of God and the splendor and
dignity of objects dedicated to the divine service. Such beauty and
splendor often greatly inspire the faithful, and draw them to the
veneration of sacred realities. It would be very improper for the
bishop's house to be cleaner and furnished more tastefully than the
abode of holiness, the palace of the living God. It would make no sense
to see holy vestments, adornments for the altar and all the furniture
in the church worn out with age and torn or dirty, while the bishop's
table is well laden, the priest's clothing very clean and finely
coordinated. Saint Peter Damian expressed this well: "It is an
accusation which brings great confusion on us that some men both offer
and lay the Lord's Body on a dirty altar cloth and that they fearlessly
place the Body of the Savior in a vessel which no lord, worm though he
is, would put to his own lips!" But We know that you are far from
committing this sin of negligence of which the holy [11]cardinal
accuses those who spend the goods acquired by the Church "not in buying
books or ornaments and utensils for their churches" but for their own
use as "necessary expenses."

6. We thought it useful to speak to you lovingly on these matters in
order to strengthen your excellent resolve. But a much more serious
subject demands that We speak of it, or rather mourn over it. We refer
to the pestilent disease which the wickedness of our times brings
forth. We must unite our minds and strength in treating this plague
before it grows rife and becomes incurable in the Church through Our
oversight. For in recent days, the dangerous times foretold by the
Apostle Paul have clearly arrived, when there will be "men who love
themselves, who are lifted up, proud, blasphemous, traitors, lovers of
pleasure instead of God, men who are always learning but never arriving
at the knowledge of truth, possessing indeed the appearance of piety
but denying its power, corrupt in mind, reprobate about the faith."
These men raise themselves up into "lying" teachers, as they are called
by Peter the prince of the Apostles, and bring in sects of perdition.
They deny the Lord who bought them and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. They say they are wise and they have become fools, and
their uncomprehending heart is darkened.

You yourselves, established as scouts in the house of Israel, see
clearly the many victories claimed by a philosophy full of deceit. You
see the ease with which it attracts to itself a great host of peoples,
concealing its impiety with the honorable name of philosophy. Who could
express in words or call to mind the wickedness of the tenets and evil
madness which it imparts? While such men apparently intend to search
out wisdom, "they fail because they do not search in the proper way...
and they fall into errors which lead them astray from ordinary wisdom."
They have come to such a height of impiety that they make out that God
does not exist, or if He does that He is idle and uncaring, making no
revelation to men. Consequently it is not surprising that they assert
that everything holy and divine is the product of the minds of
inexperienced men smitten with empty fear of the future and seduced by
a vain hope of immortality.

But those deceitful sages soften and conceal the wickedness of their
doctrine with seductive words and statements; in this way, they attract
and wretchedly ensnare many of the weak into rejecting their faith or
allowing it to be greatly shaken. While they pur sue a remarkable
knowledge, they open their eyes to behold a false light which is worse
than the very darkness. Naturally our enemy, desirous of harming us and
skilled in doing so, just as he made use of the serpent to deceive the
first human beings, has armed the tongues of those men with the poison
of his deceitfulness in order to lead astray the minds of the faithful.
The prophet prays that his soul may be delivered from such deceitful
tongues. In this way these men by their speech "enter in lowliness,
capture mildly, softly bind and kill in secret." This results in great
moral corruption, in license of thought and speech, in arrogance and
rashness in every enterprise.

7. When they have spread this darkness abroad and torn religion out of
men's hearts, these accursed philosophers proceed to destroy the bonds
of union among men, both those which unite them to their rulers, and
those which urge them to their duty. They keep proclaiming that man is
born free and subject to no one, that society accordingly is a crowd of
foolish men who stupidly yield to priests who deceive them and to kings
who oppress them, so that the harmony of priest and ruler is only a
monstrous conspiracy against the innate liberty of man.

Everyone must understand that such ravings and others like them,
concealed in many deceitful guises, cause greater ruin to public calm
the longer their impious originators are unrestrained. They cause a
serious loss of souls redeemed by Christ's blood wherever their
teaching spreads, like a cancer; it forces its way into public
academies, into the houses of the great, into the palaces of kings, and
even enters the sanctuary, shocking as it is to say so.

8. Consequently, you who are the salt of the earth, guardians and
shepherds of the Lord's flock, whose business it is to fight the
battles of the Lord, arise and gird on your sword, which is the word of
God, and expel this foul contagion from your lands. How long are we to
ignore the common insult to faith and Church? Let the words of Bernard
arouse us like a lament of the spouse of Christ: "Of old was it
foretold and the time of fulfillment is now at hand: Behold, in peace
is my sorrow most sorrowful. It was sorrowful first when the martyrs
died; afterwards it was more sorrowful in the fight with the heretics
and now it is most sorrowful in the conduct of the members of the
household.... The Church is struck within and so in peace is my sorrow
most sorrowful.

But what peace? There is peace and there is no peace. There is peace
from the pagans and peace from the heretics, but no peace from the
children. At that time the voice will lament: Sons did I rear and
exalt, but they despised me. They despised me and defiled me by a bad
life, base gain, evil traffic, and business conducted in the dark." Who
can hear these tearful complaints of our most holy mother without
feeling a strong urge to devote all his energy and effort to the
Church, as he has promised? Therefore cast out the old leaven, remove
the evil from your midst. Forcefully and carefully banish poisonous
books from the eyes of your flock, and at once courageously set apart
those who have been infected, to prevent them harming the rest. The
holy Pope Leo used to say, "We can rule those entrusted to us only by
pursuing with zeal for the Lord's faith those who destroy and those who
are destroyed and by cutting them off from sound minds with the utmost
severity to prevent the plague spreading." In doing this We exhort and
advise you to be all of one mind and in harmony as you strive for the
same object, just as the Church has one faith, one [12]baptism, and one
spirit. As you are joined together in the hierarchy, so you should
unite equally with virtue and desire.

The affair is of the greatest importance since it concerns the Catholic
faith, the purity of the Church, the teaching of the saints, the peace
of the empire, and the safety of nations.

Since it concerns the entire body of the Church, it is a special
concern of yours because you are called to share in Our pastoral
concern, and the purity of the faith is particularly entrusted to your
watchfulness. "Now therefore, Brothers, since you are overseers among
God's people and their soul depends on you, raise their hearts to your
utterance," that they may stand fast in faith and achieve the rest
which is prepared for believers only. Beseech, accuse, correct, rebuke
and fear not: for ill-judged silence leaves in their error those who
could be taught, and this is most harmful both to them and to you who
should have dispelled the error. The holy Church is powerfully
refreshed in the truth as it struggles zealously for the truth. In this
divine work you should not fear either the force or favor of your
enemies. The bishop should not fear since the anointing of the Holy
Spirit has strengthened him: the shepherd should not be afraid since
the prince of pastors has taught him by his own example to despise life
itself for the safety of his flock: the cowardice and depression of the
hireling should not dwell in a bishop's heart. Our great predecessor
Gregory, in instructing the heads of the churches, said with his usual
excellence: "Often imprudent guides in their fear of losing human favor
are afraid to speak the right freely. As the word of truth has it, they
guard their flock not with a shepherd's zeal but as hirelings do, since
they flee when the wolf approaches by hiding themselves in silence....
A shepherd fearing to speak the right is simply a man retreating by
keeping silent." But if the wicked enemy of the human race, the better
to frustrate your efforts, ever brings it about that a plague of
epidemic proportions is hidden from the religious powers of the world,
please do not be terrified but walk in God's house in harmony, with
prayer, and in truth, the three arms of our service. Remember that when
the people of Juda were defiled, the best means of purification was the
public reading to all, from the least to the greatest, of the book of
the law lately found by the priest Helcias in the Lord's temple; at
once the whole people agreed to destroy the abominations and seal a
covenant in the Lord's presence to follow after the Lord and observe
His precepts, testimonies and ceremonies with their whole heart and
soul." For the same reason Josaphat sent priests and Levites to bring
the book of the law throughout the cities of Juda and to teach the
people. The proclamation of the divine word has been entrusted to your
faith by divine, not human, authority. So assemble your people and
preach to them the gospel of Jesus Christ. From that divine source and
heavenly teaching draw draughts of true philosophy for your flock.
Persuade them that subjects ought to keep faith and show obedience to
those who by God's ordering lead and rule them. To those who are
devoted to the ministry of the Church, give proofs of faith,
continence, sobriety, knowledge, and liberality, that they may please
Him to whom they have proved themselves and boast only of what is
serious, moderate, and religious. But above all kindle in the minds of
everyone that love for one another which Christ the Lord so often and
so specifically praised. For this is the one sign of Christians and the
bond of perfection.

9. These are the chief matters on which We wanted to address you in the
Lord, Venerable Brothers. We urgently ask that We may personally
experience the pleasure of us all harmoniously preserving faithfully
the deposit entrusted to Our keeping. But Our sins prevent Us from
obtaining this without the prior help of the Lord's mercies.

May He favorably aid Us first with his blessings. So, may He forgive Us
and strengthen Our weakness in order that Our common prayer may more
speedily come into His presence. At the same time as We send you this
letter, We are sending another letter granting a jubilee to all the
faithful, hoping in God who is merciful and pities us, that as He gave
Us the power of binding and loosing on earth for the building up of His
Body, He may grant to you also and to your flocks for salvation that
you may advance from virtue to virtue, strangers to every error. This
is Our heartfelt prayer as We impart most lovingly to you, and to the
peoples entrusted to your care, the Apostolic Blessing.

Given at Rome in Saint Peter's, 25 December 1775 in the first year of
Our Pontificate.

