____________________

[8]Pope Gregory X - Papal Protection of the Jews, 7 October 1272

[9]detail of a cameo of Pope Blessed Gregory X; date unknown, artist
unknown; Cathedral de Notre Dame, Paris, France; photographed on 4
September 2007 by PHGCOM; swiped from Wikimedia Commons

1. Gregory,
bishop, servant of the servants of God, extends greetings and the
apostolic benediction to the beloved sons in Christ, the faithful
Christians, to those here now and to those in the future.

Even as it is not allowed to the Jews in their assemblies
presumptuously to undertake for themselves more than that which is
permitted them by law, even so they ought not to suffer any
disadvantage in those [privileges] which have been granted them. [This
sentence, first written by Gregory I in 598, embodies the attitude of
the Church to the Jew.] Although they prefer to persist in their
stubbornness rather than to recognize the words of their prophets and
the mysteries of the Scriptures [which, according to the Church,
foretold the coming of Jesus], and thus to arrive at a knowledge of
Christian faith and salvation; nevertheless, inasmuch as they have made
an appeal for our protection and help, we therefore admit their
petition and offer them the shield of our protection through the
clemency of Christian piety. In so doing we follow in the footsteps of
our predecessors of blessed memory, the popes of Rome -- Calixtus,
Eugene, Alexander, Clement, Innocent, and Honorius.

We decree moreover that no Christian shall compel them or any one of
their group to come to baptism unwillingly. But if any one of them
shall take refuge of his own accord with Christians, because of
conviction, then, after his intention will have been manifest, he shall
be made a Christian without any intrigue. For, indeed, that person who
is known to have come to Christian baptism not freely, but unwillingly,
is not believed to posses the Christian faith.

Moreover no Christian shall presume to seize, imprison, wound, torture,
mutilate, kill or inflict violence on them; furthermore no one shall
presume, except by judicial action of the authorities of the country,
to change the good customs in the land where they live for the purpose
of taking their money or goods from them or from others.

In addition, no one shall disturb them in any way during the
celebration of their festivals, whether by day or by night, with clubs
or stones or anything else. Also no one shall exact any compulsory
service of them unless it be that which they have been accustomed to
render in previous times.

Inasmuch as the Jews are not able to bear witness against the
Christians, we decree furthermore that the testimony of Christians
against Jews shall not be valid unless there is among these Christians
some Jew who is there for the purpose of offering testimony.

Since it happens occasionally that some Christians lose their children,
the Jews are accused by their enemies of secretly carrying off and
killing these same Christian children and of making sacrifices of the
heart and blood of these very children. It happens, too, that the
parents of these very children, or some other Christian enemies of
these Jews, secretly hide these very children in order that they may be
able to injure these Jews, and in order that they may be able to extort
from them a certain amount of money by redeeming them from their
straits. [Following the lead of Innocent IV, 1247, Gregory attacks the
ritual murder charge at length.]

And most falsely do these Christians claim that the Jews have secretly
and furtively carried away these children and killed them, and that the
Jews offer sacrifices from the heart and the blood of these children,
since their law in this matter precisely and expressly forbids Jews to
sacrifice, eat, or drink the blood, or to eat the flesh of animals
having claws. This has been demonstrated many times at our court by
Jews converted to the Christian faith: nevertheless very many Jews are
often seized and detained unjustly because of this.

We decree, therefore, that Christians need not be obeyed against Jews
in a case or situation of this type, and we order that Jews seized
under such a silly pretext be freed from imprisonment, and that they
shall not be arrested henceforth on such a miserable pretext, unless --
which we do not believe -- they be caught in the commission of the
crime. We decree that no Christian shall stir up anything new against
them, but that they should be maintained in that status and position in
which they were in the time of our predecessors, from antiquity till
now.

We decree in order to stop the wickedness and avarice of bad men, that
no one shall dare to devastate or to destroy a cemetery of the Jews or
to dig up human bodies for the sake of getting money. Moreover, if any
one, after having known the content of this decree, should -- which we
hope will not happen -- attempt audaciously to act contrary to it, then
let him suffer punishment in his rank and position, or let him be
punished by the penalty of excommunication, unless he makes amends for
his boldness by proper recompense. Moreover, we wish that only those
Jews who have not attempted to contrive anything toward the destruction
of the Christian faith be fortified by support of such protection.

Given at Orvieto by the hand of the Magister John Lectator,
vice-chancellor of the Holy Roman Church, on the 7th of October, in the
first indiction [cycle of fifteen years], in the year [10]1272 of the
divine incarnation, in the first year of the pontificate of our master,
the Pope Gregory X.

