____________________

[8]Nimiam Licentiam - On the Validity of Marriages, by Pope Benedict XIV, 18
May 1743

[9]Pope Benedict XIV To the Venerable Brothers, Archbishops and Bishops
of the Kingdom of Poland.

Venerable Brothers, Greetings and Apostolic Blessing.

We deplore the abuse by which Christian marriages, even long-stable
ones, are now dissolved in the Ecclesiastical Courts of Poland. This
abuse involves dissolution without due cause or in violation of canon
law, and threatens grave injury to the faithful. We warned about this
in Our Brief of April 11, 1741, and We exhorted you in the name of the
Lord to watch over the flock entrusted to your care. We also warned
that We were considering measures of redress and a suitable opportunity
to pursue this matter.

Hidden Marriages

Meanwhile We had learned that an evil custom of hidden marriages, more
popularly known as marriages of joint knowledge, has spread throughout
much of the Christian world. Among the resulting irregularities is that
hidden marriages of this sort were themselves being dissolved where
other marriages were publicly celebrated. In another encyclical letter
to the Venerable Brothers, Patriarchs, Primates, and all Bishops on
August 26 of the same year, We prescribed that the aforementioned evil
custom must be abrogated and the provisions of the sacred canons and
the decrees of the Council of Trent must be accurately observed.

Rules for Valid Marriages

2. Besides all this, in Our well-known letter of [10]November 3, 1741,
We enjoined laws and rules concerning the validity and nullity of
marriages. Therefore ecclesiastical judges, carried away neither by
fault or dishonesty nor by inexperience or ignorance, can safely pass
sentence on the validity or nullity of marriages, using justice rather
than their own inclinations.

Selection of Good Judges

3. Moreover it was alleged and objected that this sort of evil arose
because such cases were handled by unqualified judges. In another
encyclical addressed to all the bishops, We therefore enjoined and
commanded that each one, together with the council of the [11]Cathedral
church, make a list of suitable judges and send it to the Apostolic
See. Also Our letter of November 3, 1741 took pains to add that in
appropriate circumstances attention should be turned to the authority
of nearby bishops; if it should happen that this is not possible, only
then should another proficient and suitable judge be selected.

New Abuses

4. We were thus confident that these abuses and all irregularities
everywhere would with God's blessing be completely abolished; however,
We learned with sorrow that new deceptions and subterfuges had been
found there by which these saving ordinances could be eluded. The soul
shudders to repeat the agreements which the litigants now reached.

For instance one of them, after the ecclesiastical judge had nullified
the marriage, dared to appeal and was held for the payment of a sum of
money to the other (who acquiesced in the opinion). The soul also
shudders because the judge instructed the appellant to make all kinds
of payment.

Improper Customs in Poland

5. Having thoroughly investigated these matters, We have concluded that
the irregularity and confusion in Poland arise for the most part from
the manner and custom by which marriages are conducted there. Very
often indeed the proper pastor is not even present for the marriage
ceremony because the duty to witness the marriage has been delegated to
a randomly-selected priest, even without the knowledge of the proper
pastor. The banns announcing a couple's intent to marry must appear on
three feast days during a solemn mass in the parish church of both. But
these are often dispensed with, even though there is no legitimate and
urgent reason to do so.

6. Therefore all avenues are closed by which one could determine
whether a marriage is contracted with the necessary liberty and
consent; when any such impediment exists between the contracting
parties, the marriage must be dissolved and declared void. So the
conditions are set for annulling marriages, even those consecrated in
the Church. At times it is argued that the marriage was entered upon by
force or by fear, in either case without the free consent of one or the
other of the contracting parties; at other times a legitimate and
canonical impediment is alleged, which could have been known before the
marriage was contracted if it had not been purposefully concealed; also
at times, and this happens more frequently, a marriage is annulled
because it was contracted before another priest, even with the consent
of the parish priest or of the ordinary bishop but without the
necessary and usual formalities. Certainly it is clear that these
dissolutions of marriages in Poland are a source of evil and an open
door to crime. Furthermore the canonical benefit of appeal, which one
of the spouses can enjoy after the case is decided in favor of the
other, is impeded by these frauds and subterfuges. Finally these
frequent marriage dissolutions are not without the gravest offense and
scandal to the upright.

Annulment and Excommunication

7. To remedy this pernicious evil, We, with certain knowledge and after
mature deliberation, declare all pacts between spouses for the
dissolution of marriages to be null, invalid, and ineffectual, both now
and for the future. We also annul those pacts which interfere with the
appeals process, even if the pacts were approved by oath, and even if
they were agreed upon before the publication of our most recent letter.
So that no such pact may ever be considered valid and obligatory, We
inflict the penalty of excommunication on anyone entering into a pact,
from which no one can obtain [12]absolution except through Us and Our
successors, except at the hour of death. Besides We declare that any
judge who may have dared to announce and further the pacts We mentioned
before also incurs or will incur the same penalty of excommunication.
We again confirm whatever is contained in the aforementioned last
letter or in our Constitution, and especially all that concerns the
procedure and order of the appeals from the unsuccessful defender of
the marriage, and the sentence of the judge against the [13]annulment.

We bid your Brotherhood again to publish and disseminate the same
letter and command that this be done as though it had been expressly
inserted word for word in the present letter, just as We desire its
tenor to be expressed and inserted in this present letter.

Advice to Clergy

8. What We have said on the subject of matrimony up to this point
sufficiently informs the faithful of the sanctity of marriage. They may
now approach this great sacrament with that reverence and piety which
is fitting, and regard it as indissoluble.

Nevertheless We feel that We must also set forth to you the
distinguished and salutary rules of other well- organized dioceses
where lawsuits concerning marriages and their [14]annulment are rare.

9. The pastor is obliged to witness in person the marriages celebrated
in his parish unless a legitimate and grave reason prevents him.

Nuptial Banns

10. Before the publication of the banns, the pastor himself must take
care to question both groom and bride separately to determine whether
they consent voluntarily and freely to marry. He must also strive to
determine whether there is any impediment and, if so, what the nature
of the impediment is; whether one of the contracting parties has been
engaged and given a solemn promise to another, and whether the sons and
daughters contract with the consent of the parents. After the pastors
have diligently explored these and other relevant matters, if they find
anything in these questionings either lacking or potentially harmful,
they must suspend the banns and refer the possible obstacles to their
own bishop, who will judge the matter.

11. Now if the parish priests find nothing to prevent the banns from
being announced publicly and according to custom, then the banns are
published on three successive feast days during the mass. This follows
the prescriptions of the Lateran Council under Pope Innocent III and
those of the Council of Trent, so that any impediment heretofore
unknown may be revealed by those who hear the banns.

Pastor as Witness

12. Bishops watching vigilantly over their sheep know that matrimony is
valid before any priest, not just the parish priest, if the proper
pastor or the ordinary of the place has granted the necessary
permission. The bishops can also dispense with the banns, or permit
only one instead of three, or even none, to be read, if an urgent and
legitimate reason exists. Nevertheless they should take diligent care
that they do not use this authority indiscriminately, both in
dispensing with the banns and in permitting any priest rather than the
proper pastor to witness the marriage. Should necessity demand, they
are not to grant this authority at once, but only after they are
convinced that there is no impediment between the contracting parties.

Dispensations from the Banns

13. Concerning dispensations from the banns, the bishops clearly
understand that theirs is not at all an unbridled and immoderate
authority over this matter, but an authority for reasons of prudence to
deal with legitimate occasions that may arise. This authority is to be
used cautiously, so that in all cases they recall the words of the
Council of Trent: "But if at times there is a probable suspicion that a
matrimony might be wrongfully impeded if so many as three banns
preceded, than let only one be made, or at least let the matrimony be
celebrated before the presence of the pastor and two or three
witnesses. Then before the marriage is consummated, let the banns be
published in the church so that if there are any impediments, they may
more easily be uncovered."

14. This kind of episcopal concern and diligence regarding matrimony
removes almost all dissolutions of marriages; let us therefore follow
this path. Direct your steps on to the age-old, well-trodden way,
commended by the Council of Trent and established for all the bishops
to follow. See to it that parish priests and other spiritual leaders,
called in part to share your labors, expend similar diligence and
integrity in exercising their ministry. Do not let an easy goodwill
remove the juridical presence of the proper pastor, necessary for
contracting marriage; likewise, do not grant another priest permission
to witness a marriage for some trifling reason. The canonical laws
concerning nuptial banns are to be scrupulously kept, since they can
hardly be passed by without offending and scandalizing many. Keep them
yourselves, and see to it that they are observed by other interested
parties.

15. Do not abuse the easy dispensation of the banns without due cause.
It has inflamed lawsuits and loathing, and cannot serve as a model for
further action. A pernicious custom does not establish a norm for
action, but serves as a reproach of evil deeds.

16. It is asserted that the hasty and extensive granting of these
commissions and dispensations was due to the example and encouragement
of the Ordinary of the Apostolic See in Poland, at the time Nuncio, who
was excessively indulgent in this area. Whether truly or not, in virtue
of the authority given him, he can grant these and other dispensation,
We have restrained the authority of the present Polish Nuncio in this
matter, so that your Brotherhood, with the example and encouragement
abolished, may for the future abstain from these commissions and
dispensations.

Remedies

17. Therefore, We want you to know that We intend to apply our
authority to more efficacious and stringent remedies for curing these
evils. Even after so many exhortations and prescriptions of Apostolic
providence and authority, We did not succeed in abolishing the former
litigation concerning marriage and separation. You certainly understand
that We could justly and reasonably reserve the trials of matrimonial
cases even in the first process. But We leave to the bishops the first
and to the metropolitan the second process. We then decree that in
Polish matrimonial trials the sentence concerning the nullity of a
marriage, both in the first process by the bishops and in the second by
the metropolitan, may not be executed unless both judgments with their
arguments are first examined and approved by the [15]Cardinals, who are
the interpreters of the Council of Trent. Moreover any marriage
contracted after both judgments have been delivered in your courts,
whether or not the [16]Cardinals are considering the matter, We declare
to be null and void, both now and for the future.

18. This present letter and whatever it contains is to stand firm,
valid and efficacious, and to obtain its plenary and full effect, is to
be observed inviolate by all whom it concerns now and will concern.

19. Finally We desire that all the copies and imprints signed by the
hand of any public notary and bearing the seal of a person of an
ecclesiastical dignity, are to be given the same faith in the courts
and outside of them which would be given to the present letter if it
were presented or displayed.

20. For the rest, We beseech and exhort you to choose individual
ministers and officials for your curias who are outstanding in all the
Christian virtues, and commended by long experience. Vigorously enjoin
on them that each one has many tasks to perform in his ministry. And
you yourselves must maintain your vigilance. Remember the account to be
rendered to the Prince of pastors Jesus Christ for the flock entrusted
to your care, and remember the eternal reward in heaven promised to
those who have fought lawfully. Meanwhile as a sign of your success,
and of a richly deserved abundance of heavenly grace, We lovingly
impart the Apostolic Blessing to your Brotherhood.

Given at Rome, at Saint Mary Major, under the Ring of the Fisherman, on
May 18, 1743, in the third year of our Pontificate.

