____________________

[8]Pope Gregory III - Entrusts Boniface with a Mission to the Heathens, 15
May 739

[9]Pope Gregory III Gregory, the servant of the servants of God, to
Boniface, a holy priest.

Your holy purpose, as it has been explained to us, and your well-tried
faith lead us to make use of your services in spreading the Gospel,
which by the grace of God has been committed to our care. Knowing that
from your childhood you have been a student of Sacred Scripture and
that you now wish to use the talent entrusted to you by God in
dedicating yourself to missionary work, we rejoice in your faith and
desire to have you as our colleague in this enterprise. Wherefore.,
since you have humbly submitted to us your plans regarding this
mission, like a member of the body deferring to the head, and have
shown yourself to be a true member of the body by following the
directions given by the head, therefore, in the name of the indivisible
Trinity and by the authority of Saint Peter, Prince of the Apostles,
whose government we administer in this See by the dispensation of God,
we now place your humble and devout work upon a secure basis and decree
that you go forth to preach the Word of God to those people who are
still bound by the shackles of paganism. You are to teach them the
service of the kingdom of God by persuading them to accept the truth in
the name of Christ, the Lord our God. You will instill into their minds
the teaching of the Old and New Testaments, doing this in a spirit of
love and moderation, and with arguments suited to their understanding.
Finally, we command you that in admitting within the Church those who
have some kind of belief in God you will insist upon using the
sacramental discipline prescribed in the official ritual formulary of
the Holy Apostolic See. Whatever means you find lacking in the
furtherance of your work, you are to report to us as opportunity
occurs.

Fare you well.

Given on the Ides of May in the third year of our most august Lord,
Leo, by God crowned emperor, in the third year of his consulship, in
the second indiction.

