____________________

[8]Pope John Paul II - A Life of Heroic Humility and Obedience

Dear Brothers and Sisters!

1. I am pleased to offer you a cordial welcome and to express to you my
joy at the special event which has brought us together here. You have
come in large numbers to make your [9]pilgrimage to [10]Rome and to
pass through the Holy Door of the Great Jubilee. I greet [11]Cardinal
Sodano, Secretary of State. I greet dear [12]Archbishop Riccardo
Fontana of [13]Spoleto-[14]Norcia and thank him for the words and good
wishes he addressed to me on your behalf. I greet [15]Cardinal Opilio
Rossi, the Armenian Patriarch and all the [16]Bishops present. I greet
the Fathers General, the religious and [17]nuns of the Order of Saint
Augustine, as well as the authorities of every order and rank. Your
presence reminds me of the visit I made 20 years ago to the town of
Cascia to visit the people struck by the earthquake of [18]1979. Saint
Rita knew the sufferings of the human heart Among us today is an
illustrious [19]pilgrim who joins us from heaven in our prayer. It is
Saint Rita of Cascia, whose mortal remains, brought to Rome by the
Italian Police, accompany the crowds of those who devotedly call upon
her with affectionate familiarity and confidently bring to her the
problems and anxieties that weigh upon their hearts. Today it is as if
the shrine of Cascia had been moved to Saint Peter's Square. And you
have come to venerate her, dear pilgrims, from every part of the world.
Together with her you intend to renew your deepest sentiments of
fidelity and communion to the Pope, as she did in her lifetime. The
mortal remains of Saint Rita, which we venerate here today, are a
significant sign of what the Lord accomplishes in history when he finds
humble hearts open to his love. Here we see the frail body of a woman
who was small in stature but great in holiness, who lived in humility
and is now known throughout the world for her heroic Christian life as
a wife, mother, widow and nun. Deeply rooted in the love of Christ,
Rita found in her faith unshakeable strength to be a woman of peace in
every situation. In her example of total abandonment to God, in her
transparent simplicity and in her unflinching fidelity to the Gospel,
we too can find sound direction for being authentic Christian witnesses
at the dawn of the third millennium.

2. But what is the message that this saint passes on to us? It is a
message that flows from her life: humility and obedience were the path
that Rita took to be ever more perfectly conformed to the Crucified
One. The mark which shines on her forehead is the verification of her
Christian maturity. On the Cross with Jesus, she is crowned in a
certain way with the love that she knew and heroically expressed within
her home and by her participation in the events of her town. Following
the spirituality of Saint Augustine, she became a disciple of the
Crucified One and an "expert in suffering"; she learned to understand
the sorrows of the human heart. Rita thus became the advocate of the
[20]poor and the despairing, obtaining countless graces of consolation
and comfort for those who called upon her in the most varied
situations. [21]Rita of Cascia was the first [22]woman to be
[23]canonized in the Great Jubilee at the beginning of the [24]20th
century, [25]24 May [26]1900. In decreeing her sainthood, my
predecessor [27]Leo XIII observed that she pleased Christ so much that
he chose to imprint upon her the seal of his charity and his passion.
This privilege was granted to her for her exceptional humility, her
interior detachment from earthly desires and the admirable penitential
spirit which accompanied her at every moment of her life.

3. Today, 100 years after her canonization, I am pleased to offer her
again as a sign of hope, especially to families. Dear Christian
families, by imitating her example, may you also know how to find in
your fidelity to Christ the strength to fulfil your mission of service
to the civilization of love! If we ask Saint Rita for the secret to
this extraordinary work of social and spiritual renewal, she replies:
fidelity to the Love that was crucified. Rita, with Christ and like
Christ, goes to the Cross always and only through love. Like her, then,
let us turn our eyes and hearts to Jesus, who died on the Cross and
rose for our salvation. It is he, our Redeemer, who makes the family's
mission of unity and fidelity possible, as he did for this beloved
saint, even in moments of crisis and difficulty. And it is he who gives
concrete form to the Christian commitment to building peace by helping
them to overcome the conflicts and tensions which unfortunately are so
frequent in daily life. Live as witnesses to a hope that never
disappoints

4. The saint of Cascia belongs to the great host of Christian women who
"have had a signifiant impact on the life of the Church as well as of
society". Rita well interpreted the "feminine genius" by living it
intensely in both physical and spiritual motherhood. On the sixth
centenary of her birth I recalled that her lesson "is concentrated on
these typical elements of spirituality: the offer of forgiveness and
the acceptance of suffering, not through a form of passive resignation
... but through the strength of that love for Christ who, precisely in
the episode of his being crowned, suffered, along with other
humiliations, an atrocious parody of his kingship". Dear brothers and
sisters, the worldwide devotion to St Rita is symbolized by the rose.
It is to be hoped that the life of everyone devoted to her will be like
the rose picked in the garden of Roccaporena the winter before the
saint's death. That is, let it be a life sustained by passionate love
for the Lord Jesus; a life capable of responding to suffering and to
thorns with forgiveness and the total gift of self, in order to spread
everywhere the good odour of Christ (cf. 2 Cor 2:15) through a
consistently lived proclamation of the Gospel. Dear devoted pilgrims,
Rita offers her rose to each of you: in receiving it spiritually strive
to live as witnesses to a hope that never disappoints and as
missionaries of a life that conquers death.

5. I now extend my cordial greeting to the members of the Italian
National Federation of the Knights of Labour, who have come to Rome to
celebrate their Jubilee. I welcome you all. Dear friends, your activity
seeks to improve the economic and social standing of workers. I hope
that through your efforts you can always contribute to the common good,
to the formation of young people who will have a place in the world of
production, to the gradual elimination of unjust inequalities and to
the solution of the worrying problem of unemployment. As you face the
rapid changes affecting modern society, be ready to meet the current
challenges of economics and globalization, without ever losing sight of
the fundamental values of human dignity, solidarity with the weakest,
the humanization of labour and the social nature of work.

6. Dear brothers and sisters, I invoke Mary's protection on you in this
month which is particularly dedicated to her. Through her intercession
and through the intercession of [28]Saint Rita and [29]Saint Benedict,
may you and your loved ones be granted all the graces you need. I
assure you of my prayer for this, as I cordially bless you all.

- Address on the 100th anniversary of the canonization of [30]Saint
[31]Rita of Cascia, by [32]Pope [33]John Paul II, [34]20 May [35]2000.

