____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 12 November 2008 - Saint Paul and
Eschatology: The Expectation of the Parusia

1. Saint Paul the Apostle

The subject of the Resurrection on which we
reflected last week unfolds a new perspective, that of the expectation
of the Lord's return. It thus brings us to ponder on the relationship
among the present time, the time of the Church and of the Kingdom of
Christ, and the future (Ã©schaton) that lies in store for us, when
Christ will consign the Kingdom to his Father (cf. 1 Cor 15: 24). Every
Christian discussion of the last things, called eschatology, always
starts with the event of the Resurrection; in this event the last
things have already begun and, in a certain sense, are already present.

Very likely it was in the year 52 that Saint Paul wrote the first of
his Letters, the First Letter to the Thessalonians, in which he speaks
of this return of Jesus, called parusia or advent, his new, definitive
and manifest presence (cf. 4: 13-18). The Apostle wrote these words to
the Thessalonians who were beset by doubts and problems: "For if we
believe that Jesus died and rose, God will bring forth with him from
the dead those who have fallen asleep" (4: 14). And Paul continues:
"those who have died in Christ will rise first. Then we, the living,
the survivors, will be caught up with them in the clouds to meet the
Lord in the air. Thenceforth we shall be with the Lord unceasingly" (4:
16-17). Paul describes Christ's parusia in especially vivid tones and
with symbolic imagery which, however, conveys a simple and profound
message: we shall ultimately be with the Lord for ever. Over and above
the images, this is the essential message: our future is "to be with
the Lord". As believers, we are already with the Lord in our lifetime;
our future, eternal life, has already begun.

In his Second Letter to the Thessalonians, Paul changes his
perspective. He speaks of the negative incidents that must precede the
final and conclusive event. We must not let ourselves be deceived, he
says, to think that, according to chronological calculations, the day
of the Lord is truly imminent: "On the question of the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him, we beg you, brothers,
not to be so easily agitated or terrified, whether by an oracular
utterance, or rumor, or a letter alleged to be ours, into believing
that the day of the Lord is here. Let no one seduce you, no matter how"
(2: 1-3). The continuation of this text announces that before the
Lord's arrival there will be apostasy, and one well described as the
"man of lawlessness", "the son of perdition" (2: 3) must be revealed,
who tradition would come to call the Antichrist. However the intention
of Saint Paul's Letter is primarily practical. He writes: "Indeed, when
we were with you, we used to lay down the rule that who would not work,
should not eat. We hear that some of you are unruly, not keeping busy
but acting like busybodies. We enjoin all such and we urge them
strongly in the Lord Jesus Christ, to earn the food they eat by working
quietly" (3: 10-12). In other words, the expectation of Jesus' parusia
does not dispense us from working in this world but, on the contrary,
creates responsibility to the divine Judge for our actions in this
world. For this very reason our responsibility for working in and for
this world increases. We shall see the same thing next Sunday in the
Gospel of the Talents, in which the Lord tells us that he has entrusted
talents to everyone and that the Judge will ask for an account of them
saying: have they been put to good use? Hence the expectation of his
return implies responsibility for this world.

The same thing and the same connection between parusia the return of
the Judge/Saviour and our commitment in our lives appears in another
context and with new aspects in the Letter to the Philippians. Paul is
in prison, awaiting a sentence that might be condemnation to death. In
this situation he is reflecting on his future existence with the Lord,
but he is also thinking of the community of the Philippians who need
their father, Paul, and he writes: "For me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain. If I am to go on living in the flesh, that means
productive toil for me and I do not know which to prefer. I am strongly
attracted by both: I long to depart and be with Christ, for that is far
better; yet it is more urgent that I remain alive for your sakes. This
fills me with confidence that I will stay with you, and persevere with
you all, for your joy and progress in the faith. My being with you once
again should give you ample cause to glory in Christ" (1: 21-26). Paul
has no fear of death; indeed, on the contrary, death indicates being
totally with Christ. Yet Paul also shares in the sentiments of Christ
who did not live for himself but for us. Living for others becomes his
life and plan thus demonstrates his perfect readiness to do God's will,
to do whatever God decides. Above all he is prepared, in the future as
well, to live on this earth for others, to live for Christ, to live for
his living presence and thus for the renewal of the world. We see that
his being with Christ creates an broad inner freedom: freedom in the
face of the threat of death but also freedom in the face of all life's
commitments and sufferings. He is simply at God's disposal and truly
free.

And now, after examining the various aspects of the expectation of
Christ's parusia, let us ask ourselves: what are the basic convictions
of Christians as regards the last things: death, the end of the world?
Their first conviction is the certainty that Jesus is Risen and is with
the Father and thus is with us forever. And no one is stronger than
Christ, for he is with the Father, he is with us. We are consequently
safe, free of fear. This was an essential effect of Christian
preaching. Fear of spirits and divinities was widespread in the ancient
world. Today too, missionaries alongside many good elements in natural
religions encounter fear of the spirits, of evil powers that threaten
us. Christ lives, he has overcome death, he has overcome all these
powers. We live in this certainty, in this freedom, and in this joy.
This is the first aspect of our living with regard to the future.

The second is the certainty that Christ is with me. And just as the
future world in Christ has already begun, this also provides the
certainty of hope. The future is not darkness in which no one can find
his way. It is not like this. Without Christ, even today the world's
future is dark, and fear of the future is so common. Christians know
that Christ's light is stronger and therefore they live with a hope
that is not vague, with a hope that gives them certainty and courage to
face the future.

Lastly, their third conviction is that the Judge who returns at the
same time as Judge and Saviour has left us the duty to live in this
world in accordance with his way of living. He has entrusted his
talents to us. Our third conviction, therefore, is responsibility
before Christ for the world, for our brethren and at the same time also
for the certainty of his mercy. Both these things are important. Since
God can only be merciful we do not live as if good and evil were the
same thing. This would be a deception. In reality, we live with a great
responsibility. We have talents, and our responsibility is to work so
that this world may be open to Christ, that it be renewed. Yet even as
we work responsibly, we realize that God is the true Judge. We are also
certain that this Judge is good; we know his Face, the Face of the
Risen Christ, of Christ crucified for us. Therefore we can be certain
of his goodness and advance with great courage.

Another element in the Pauline teaching on eschatology is the
universality of the call to faith which unites Jews and Gentiles that
is, non-Christians as a sign and an anticipation of the future reality.
For this reason we can say that we are already seated in Heaven with
Jesus Christ, but to reveal the riches of grace in the centuries to
come (Eph 2: 6f.), the after becomes a before, in order to show the
state of incipient fulfilment in which we live. This makes bearable the
sufferings of the present time which, in any case, cannot be compared
to the future glory (cf. Rm 8: 18). We walk by faith, not by sight, and
even if we might rather leave the body to live with the Lord, what
definitively matters, whether we are dwelling in the body or are far
from it, is that we be pleasing to him (cf. 2 Cor 5: 7-9).

Finally, a last point that might seem to us somewhat difficult. At the
end of his First Letter to the Corinthians, Saint Paul reiterates and
also puts on the lips of the Corinthians a prayer that originated in
the first Christian communities in the Palestinian area: Maranatha!
which means literally, "Our Lord, come!" (16: 22). It was the prayer of
early Christianity and also of the last book of the New Testament,
Revelation, which ends with it: "Come, Lord Jesus!". Can we pray like
this too? It seems to me that for us today, in our lives, in our world,
it is difficult to pray sincerely for the world to perish so that the
new Jerusalem, the Last Judgment and the Judge, Christ, may come. I
think that even if, sincerely, we do not dare to pray like this for a
number of reasons yet, in a correct and proper way, we too can say,
together with the early Christians: "Come, Lord Jesus!". We do not of
course desire the end of the world. Nevertheless, we do want this
unjust world to end. We also want the world to be fundamentally
changed, we want the beginning of the civilization of love, the arrival
of a world of justice and peace, without violence, without hunger. We
want all this, yet how can it happen without Christ's presence? Without
Christ's presence there will never be a truly just and renewed world.
And even if we do so in a different way, we too can and must also say,
completely and profoundly, with great urgency and amid the
circumstances of our time: "Come, Lord Jesus! Come in your way, in the
ways that you know. Come wherever there is injustice and violence. Come
to the refugee camps, in Darfur, in North Kivu, in so many parts of the
world. Come wherever drugs prevail. Come among those wealthy people who
have forgotten you, who live for themselves alone. Come wherever you
are unknown. Come in your way and renew today's world. And come into
our hearts, come and renew our lives, come into our hearts so that we
ourselves may become the light of God, your presence. In this way let
us pray with Saint Paul: Maranatha! "Come, Lord Jesus!" and let us pray
that Christ may truly be present in our world today and renew it.

