____________________

[8]Ad Caeli Reginam - On Proclaiming the Queenship of Mary, by Pope Pius XII,
11 October 1954

Encyclical of [10]Pope [11]Pius XII promulgated on 11
October 1954

1. To the Venerable Brethren, the Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops,
Bishops and other Local Ordinaries in Peace and Communion with the Holy
See.

Venerable Brethren, Health and Apostolic Blessing.

From the earliest ages of the Catholic Church a Christian people,
whether in time of triumph or more especially in time of crisis, has
addressed prayers of petition and hymns of praise and veneration to the
Queen of Heaven. And never has that hope wavered which they placed in
the Mother of the Divine King, Jesus Christ; nor has that faith ever
failed by which we are taught that Mary, the Virgin Mother of God,
reigns with a mother's solicitude over the entire world, just as she is
crowned in heavenly blessedness with the glory of a Queen.

2. Following upon the frightful calamities which before Our very eyes
have reduced flourishing cities, towns, and villages to ruins, We see
to Our sorrow that many great moral evils are being spread abroad in
what may be described as a violent flood. Occasionally We behold
justice giving way; and, on the one hand and the other, the victory of
the powers of corruption. The threat of this fearful crisis fills Us
with a great anguish, and so with confidence We have recourse to Mary
Our Queen, making known to her those sentiments of filial reverence
which are not Ours alone, but which belong to all those who glory in
the name of Christian.

3. It is gratifying to recall that We ourselves, on the first day of
November of the Holy Year 1950, before a huge multitude of
[12]Cardinals, Bishops, priests, and of the faithful who had assembled
from every part of the world, defined the dogma of the Assumption of
the Blessed Virgin Mary into heaven^[13]1 where she is present in soul
and body reigning, together with her only Son, amid the heavenly choirs
of angels and Saints. Moreover, since almost a century has passed since
Our predecessor of immortal memory, Pius IX, proclaimed and defined the
dogma that the great Mother of God had been conceived without any stain
of original sin, We instituted the current Marian Year^[14]2 And now it
is a great consolation to Us to see great multitudes here in Rome - and
especially in the Liberian Basilica - giving testimony in a striking
way to their faith and ardent love for their heavenly Mother. In all
parts of the world We learn that devotion to the Virgin Mother of God
is flourishing more and more, and that the principal shrines of Mary
have been visited and are still being visited by many throngs of
Catholic pilgrims gathered in prayer.

4. It is well known that we have taken advantage of every opportunity -
through personal audiences and radio broadcasts - to exhort Our
children in Christ to a strong and tender love, as becomes children,
for Our most gracious and exalted Mother. On this point it is
particularly fitting to call to mind the radio message which We
addressed to the people of Portugal, when the miraculous image of the
Virgin Mary which is venerated at Fatima was being crowned with a
golden diadem.^[15]3 We Ourselves called this the heralding of the
"sovereignty" of Mary.^[16]4

5. And now, that We may bring the Year of Mary to a happy and
beneficial conclusion, and in response to petitions which have come to
Us from all over the world, We have decided to institute the liturgical
feast of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen. This will afford a climax, as
it were, to the manifold demonstrations of Our devotion to Mary, which
the Christian people have supported with such enthusiasm.

6. In this matter We do not wish to propose a new truth to be believed
by Christians, since the title and the arguments on which Mary's
queenly dignity is based have already been clearly set forth, and are
to be found in ancient documents of the Church and in the books of the
sacred liturgy.

7. It is Our pleasure to recall these things in the present encyclical
letter, that We may renew the praises of Our heavenly Mother, and
enkindle a more fervent devotion towards her, to the spiritual benefit
of all mankind.

8. From early times Christians have believed, and not without reason,
that she of whom was born the Son of the Most High received privileges
of grace above all other beings created by God. He "will reign in the
house of Jacob forever,"^[17]5 "the Prince of Peace,"^[18]6 the "King
of Kings and Lord of Lords."^[19]7 And when Christians reflected upon
the intimate connection that obtains between a mother and a son, they
readily acknowledged the supreme royal dignity of the Mother of God.

9. Hence it is not surprising that the early writers of the Church
called Mary "the Mother of the King" and "the Mother of the Lord,"
basing their stand on the words of Saint Gabriel the archangel, who
foretold that the Son of Mary would reign forever,^[20]8 and on the
words of Elizabeth who greeted her with reverence and called her "the
Mother of my Lord."^[21]9 Thereby they clearly signified that she
derived a certain eminence and exalted station from the royal dignity
of her Son.

10. So it is that Saint Ephrem, burning with poetic inspiration,
represents her as speaking in this way: "Let Heaven sustain me in its
embrace, because I am honored above it. For heaven was not Thy mother,
but Thou hast made it Thy throne. How much more honorable and venerable
than the throne of a king is her mother."^[22]10 And in another place
he thus prays to her: ". . . Majestic and Heavenly Maid, Lady, Queen,
protect and keep me under your wing lest Satan the sower of destruction
glory over me, lest my wicked foe be victorious against me."^[23]11

11. Saint Gregory Nazianzen calls Mary "the Mother of the King of the
universe," and the "Virgin Mother who brought forth the King of the
whole world,"^[24]12 while Prudentius asserts that the Mother marvels
"that she has brought forth God as man, and even as Supreme
King."^[25]13

12. And this royal dignity of the Blessed Virgin Mary is quite clearly
indicated through direct assertion by those who call her "Lady,"
"Ruler" and "Queen."

13. In one of the homilies attributed to [26]Origen, Elizabeth calls
Mary "the Mother of my Lord." and even addresses her as "Thou, my
Lady."^[27]14

14. The same thing is found in the writings of Saint Jerome where he
makes the following statement amidst various interpretations of Mary's
name: "We should realize that Mary means Lady in the Syrian
Language."^[28]15 After him Saint Chrysologus says the same thing more
explicitly in these words: "The Hebrew word `Mary' means `Domina.' The
Angel therefore addresses her as `Lady' to preclude all servile fear in
the Lord's Mother, who was born and was called `Lady' by the authority
and command of her own Son."^[29]16

15. Moreover Epiphanius, the bishop of Constantinople, writing to the
Sovereign Pontiff Hormisdas, says that we should pray that the unity of
the Church may be preserved "by the grace of the holy and
consubstantial Trinity and by the prayers of Mary, Our Lady, the holy
and glorious Virgin and Mother of God."^[30]17

16. The Blessed Virgin, sitting at the right hand of God to pray for us
is hailed by another writer of that same era in these words, "the Queen
of mortal man, the most holy Mother of God."^[31]18

17. Saint Andrew of Crete frequently attributes the dignity of a Queen
to the Virgin Mary. For example, he writes, "Today He transports from
her earthly dwelling, as Queen of the human race, His ever-Virgin
Mother, from whose womb He, the living God, took on human form."^[32]19

18. And in another place he speaks of "the Queen of the entire human
race faithful to the exact meaning of her name, who is exalted above
all things save only God himself."^[33]20

19. Likewise Saint Germanus speaks to the humble Virgin in these words:
"Be enthroned, Lady, for it is fitting that you should sit in an
exalted place since you are a Queen and glorious above all
kings."^[34]21 He likewise calls her the "Queen of all of those who
dwell on earth."^[35]22

20. She is called by Saint John Damascene: "Queen, ruler, and
lady,"^[36]23 and also "the Queen of every creature."^[37]24 Another
ancient writer of the Eastern Church calls her "favored Queen," "the
perpetual Queen beside the King, her son," whose "snow-white brow is
crowned with a golden diadem."^[38]25

21. And finally Saint Ildephonsus of Toledo gathers together almost all
of her titles of honor in this salutation: "O my Lady, my Sovereign,
You who rule over me, Mother of my Lord . . . Lady among handmaids,
Queen among sisters."^[39]26

22. The theologians of the Church, deriving their teaching from these
and almost innumerable other testimonies handed down long ago, have
called the most Blessed Virgin the Queen of all creatures, the Queen of
the world, and the Ruler of all.

23. The Supreme Shepherds of the Church have considered it their duty
to promote by eulogy and exhortation the devotion of the Christian
people to the heavenly Mother and Queen. Simply passing over the
documents of more recent Pontiffs, it is helpful to recall that as
early as the seventh century Our predecessor [40]Saint [41]Martin I
called Mary "our glorious Lady, ever Virgin."^[42]27 Saint Agatho, in
the synodal letter sent to the fathers of the Sixth Ecumenical Council
called her "Our Lady, truly and in a proper sense the Mother of
God."^[43]28 And in the eighth century Gregory II in the letter sent to
Saint Germanus, the patriarch, and read in the Seventh Ecumenical
Council with all the Fathers concurring, called the Mother of God: "The
Queen of all, the true Mother of God," and also "the Queen of all
Christians."^[44]29

24. We wish also to recall that Our predecessor of immortal memory,
Sixtus IV, touched favorably upon the doctrine of the Immaculate
Conception of the Blessed Virgin, beginning the Apostolic Letter Cum
praeexcelsa^[45]30 with words in which Mary is called "Queen," "Who is
always vigilant to intercede with the king whom she bore."

[46]Benedict XIV declared the same thing in his Apostolic Letter
Gloriosae Dominae, in which Mary is called "Queen of heaven and earth,"
and it is stated that the sovereign King has in some way communicated
to her his ruling power.^[47]31

25. For all these reasons Saint Alphonsus Ligouri, in collecting the
testimony of past ages, writes these words with evident devotion:
"Because the virgin Mary was raised to such a lofty dignity as to be
the mother of the King of kings, it is deservedly and by every right
that the Church has honored her with the title of `Queen'."^[48]32

26. Furthermore, the sacred liturgy, which acts as a faithful
reflection of traditional doctrine believed by the Christian people
through the course of all the ages both in the East and in the West,
has sung the praises of the heavenly Queen and continues to sing them.

27. Ardent voices from the East sing out: "O Mother of God, today thou
art carried into heaven on the chariots of the cherubim, the seraphim
wait upon thee and the ranks of the heavenly army bow before
thee."^[49]33

28. Further: "O just, O most blessed Joseph), since thou art sprung
from a royal line, thou hast been chosen from among all mankind to be
spouse of the pure Queen who, in a way which defies description, will
give birth to Jesus the king."^[50]34 In addition: "I shall sing a hymn
to the mother, the Queen, whom I joyously approach in praise, gladly
celebrating her wonders in song. . . Our tongue cannot worthily praise
thee, O Lady; for thou who hast borne Christ the king art exalted above
the seraphim. . . Hail, O Queen of the world; hail, O Mary, Queen of us
all."^[51]35

29. We read, moreover, in the Ethiopic Missal: "O Mary, center of the
whole world, . . . thou art greater than the many-eyed cherubim and the
six-winged seraphim . . . Heaven and earth are filled with the sanctity
of thy glory."^[52]36

30. Furthermore, the Latin Church sings that sweet and ancient prayer
called the "Hail, Holy Queen" and the lovely antiphons "Hail, Queen of
the Heavens," "O Queen of Heaven, Rejoice," and those others which we
are accustomed to recite on feasts of the Blessed Virgin Mary: "The
Queen stood at Thy right hand in golden vesture surrounded with
beauty"^[53]37; "Heaven and earth praise thee as a powerful
Queen"^[54]38; "Today the Virgin Mary ascends into heaven: rejoice
because she reigns with Christ forever."^[55]39

31. To these and others should be added the Litany of Loreto which
daily invites Christian folk to call upon Mary as Queen. Likewise, for
many centuries past Christians have been accustomed to meditate upon
the ruling power of Mary which embraces heaven and earth, when they
consider the fifth glorious mystery of the rosary which can be called
the mystical crown of the heavenly Queen.

32. Finally, art which is based upon Christian principles and is
animated by their spirit as something faithfully interpreting the
sincere and freely expressed devotion of the faithful, has since the
[56]Council of Ephesus portrayed Mary as Queen and Empress seated upon
a royal throne adorned with royal insignia, crowned with the royal
diadem and surrounded by the host of angels and saints in heaven, and
ruling not only over nature and its powers but also over the
machinations of Satan. Iconography, in representing the royal dignity
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, has ever been enriched with works of
highest artistic value and greatest beauty; it has even taken the form
of representing colorfully the divine Redeemer crowning His mother with
a resplendent diadem.

33. The Roman Pontiffs, favoring such types of popular devotion, have
often crowned, either in their own persons, or through representatives,
images of the Virgin Mother of God which were already outstanding by
reason of public veneration.

34. As We have already mentioned, Venerable Brothers, according to
ancient tradition and the sacred liturgy the main principle on which
the royal dignity of Mary rests is without doubt her Divine Motherhood.
In Holy Writ, concerning the Son whom Mary will conceive, We read this
sentence: "He shall be called the Son of the most High, and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of David his father, and he shall
reign in the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be
no end,"^[57]40 and in addition Mary is called "Mother of the
Lord";^[58]41 from this it is easily concluded that she is a Queen,
since she bore a son who, at the very moment of His conception, because
of the hypostatic union of the human nature with the Word, was also as
man King and Lord of all things. So with complete justice Saint John
Damascene could write: "When she became Mother of the Creator, she
truly became Queen of every creature."^[59]42 Likewise, it can be said
that the heavenly voice of the Archangel Gabriel was the first to
proclaim Mary's royal office.

35. But the Blessed Virgin Mary should be called Queen, not only
because of her Divine Motherhood, but also because God has willed her
to have an exceptional role in the work of our eternal salvation. "What
more joyful, what sweeter thought can we have" - as Our Predecessor of
happy memory, Pius XI wrote - "than that Christ is our King not only by
natural right, but also by an acquired right: that which He won by the
redemption? Would that all men, now forgetful of how much we cost Our
Savior, might recall to mind the words, `You were redeemed, not with
gold or silver which perishes, . . . but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb spotless and undefiled.^[60]43 We belong not to
ourselves now, since Christ has bought us `at a great
price'."^[61]44/^[62]45

36. Now, in the accomplishing of this work of redemption, the Blessed
Virgin Mary was most closely associated with Christ; and so it is
fitting to sing in the sacred liturgy: "Near the cross of Our Lord
Jesus Christ there stood, sorrowful, the Blessed Mary, Queen of Heaven
and Queen of the World."^[63]46 Hence, as the devout disciple of Saint
Anselm (Eadmer, ed.) wrote in the Middle Ages: "just as . . . God, by
making all through His power, is Father and Lord of all, so the blessed
Mary, by repairing all through her merits, is Mother and Queen of all;
for God is the Lord of all things, because by His command He
establishes each of them in its own nature, and Mary is the Queen of
all things, because she restores each to its original dignity through
the grace which she merited.^[64]47

37. For "just as Christ, because He redeemed us, is our Lord and king
by a special title, so the Blessed Virgin also (is our queen), on
account of the unique manner in which she assisted in our redemption,
by giving of her own substance, by freely offering Him for us, by her
singular desire and petition for, and active interest in, our
salvation."^[65]48

38. From these considerations, the proof develops on these lines: if
Mary, in taking an active part in the work of salvation, was, by God's
design, associated with Jesus Christ, the source of salvation itself,
in a manner comparable to that in which Eve was associated with Adam,
the source of death, so that it may be stated that the work of our
salvation was accomplished by a kind of "recapitulation,"^[66]49 in
which a virgin was instrumental in the salvation of the human race,
just as a virgin had been closely associated with its death; if,
moreover, it can likewise be stated that this glorious Lady had been
chosen Mother of Christ "in order that she might become a partner in
the redemption of the human race";^[67]50 and if, in truth, "it was she
who, free of the stain of actual and original sin, and ever most
closely bound to her Son, on Golgotha offered that Son to the Eternal
Father together with the complete sacrifice of her maternal rights and
maternal love, like a new Eve, for all the sons of Adam, stained as
they were by his lamentable fall,"^[68]51 then it may be legitimately
concluded that as Christ, the new Adam, must be called a King not
merely because He is Son of God, but also because He is our Redeemer,
so, analogously, the Most Blessed Virgin is queen not only because she
is Mother of God, but also because, as the new Eve, she was associated
with the new Adam.

39. Certainly, in the full and strict meaning of the term, only Jesus
Christ, the God-Man, is King; but Mary, too, as Mother of the divine
Christ, as His associate in the redemption, in his struggle with His
enemies and His final victory over them, has a share, though in a
limited and analogous way, in His royal dignity. For from her union
with Christ she attains a radiant eminence transcending that of any
other creature; from her union with Christ she receives the royal right
to dispose of the treasures of the Divine Redeemer's Kingdom; from her
union with Christ finally is derived the inexhaustible efficacy of her
maternal intercession before the Son and His Father.

40. Hence it cannot be doubted that Mary most Holy is far above all
other creatures in dignity, and after her Son possesses primacy over
all. "You have surpassed every creature," sings Saint Sophronius. "What
can be more sublime than your joy, O Virgin Mother? What more noble
than this grace, which you alone have received from God"?^[69]52 To
this Saint Germanus adds: "Your honor and dignity surpass the whole of
creation; your greatness places you above the angels."^[70]53 And Saint
John Damascene goes so far as to say: "Limitless is the difference
between God's servants and His Mother."^[71]54

41. In order to understand better this sublime dignity of the Mother of
God over all creatures let us recall that the holy Mother of God was,
at the very moment of her Immaculate Conception, so filled with grace
as to surpass the grace of all the Saints. Wherefore, as Our
Predecessor of happy memory, Pius IX wrote, God "showered her with
heavenly gifts and graces from the treasury of His divinity so far
beyond what He gave to all the angels and saints that she was ever free
from the least stain of sin; she is so beautiful and perfect, and
possesses such fullness of innocence and holiness, that under God a
greater could not be dreamed, and only God can comprehend the
marvel."^[72]55

42. Besides, the Blessed Virgin possessed, after Christ, not only the
highest degree of excellence and perfection, but also a share in that
influence by which He, her Son and our Redeemer, is rightly said to
reign over the minds and wills of men. For if through His Humanity the
divine Word performs miracles and gives graces, if He uses His
Sacraments and Saints as instruments for the salvation of men, why
should He not make use of the role and work of His most holy Mother in
imparting to us the fruits of redemption? "With a heart that is truly a
mother's," to quote again Our Predecessor of immortal memory, Pius IX,
"does she approach the problem of our salvation, and is solicitous for
the whole human race; made Queen of heaven and earth by the Lord,
exalted above all choirs of angels and saints, and standing at the
right hand of her only a Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, she intercedes
powerfully for us with a mother's prayers, obtains what she seeks, and
cannot be refused."^[73]56 On this point another of Our Predecessors of
happy memory, Leo XIII, has said that an "almost immeasurable" power
has been given Mary in the distribution of graces;^[74]57 Saint Pius X
adds that she fills this office "as by the right of a mother."^[75]58

43. Let all Christians, therefore, glory in being subjects of the
Virgin Mother of God, who, while wielding royal power, is on fire with
a mother's love.

44. Theologians and preachers, however, when treating these and like
questions concerning the Blessed Virgin, must avoid straying from the
correct course, with a twofold error to guard against: that is to say,
they must beware of unfounded opinions and exaggerated expressions
which go beyond the truth, on the other hand, they must watch out for
excessive narrowness of mind in weighing that exceptional, sublime,
indeed all but divine dignity of the Mother of God, which the Angelic
Doctor teaches must be attributed to her "because of the infinite
goodness that is God."^[76]59

45. For the rest, in this as in other points of Christian doctrine,
"the proximate and universal norm of truth" is for all the living
Magisterium of the Church, which Christ established "also to illustrate
and explain those matters which are contained only in an obscure way,
and implicitly in the deposit of faith."^[77]60

46. From the ancient Christian documents, from prayers of the liturgy,
from the innate piety of the Christian people, from works of art, from
every side We have gathered witnesses to the regal dignity of the
Virgin Mother of God; We have likewise shown that the arguments deduced
by Sacred Theology from the treasure store of the faith fully confirm
this truth. Such a wealth of witnesses makes up a resounding chorus
which changes the sublimity of the royal dignity of the Mother of God
and of men, to whom every creature is subject, who is "exalted to the
heavenly throne, above the choirs of angels."^[78]61

47. Since we are convinced, after long and serious reflection, that
great good will accrue to the Church if this solidly established truth
shines forth more clearly to all, like a luminous lamp raised aloft, by
Our Apostolic authority We decree and establish the feast of Mary's
Queenship, which is to be celebrated every year in the whole world on
the 31st of May. We likewise ordain that on the same day the
consecration of the human race to the Immaculate Heart of the Blessed
Virgin Mary be renewed, cherishing the hope that through such
consecration a new era may begin, joyous in Christian peace and in the
triumph of religion.

48. Let all, therefore, try to approach with greater trust the throne
of grace and mercy of our Queen and Mother, and beg for strength in
adversity, light in darkness, consolation in sorrow; above all let them
strive to free themselves from the slavery of sin and offer an
unceasing homage, filled with filial loyalty, to their Queenly Mother.
Let her churches be thronged by the faithful, her feast-days honored;
may the beads of the Rosary be in the hands of all; may Christians
gather, in small numbers and large, to sing her praises in churches, in
homes, in hospitals, in prisons. May Mary's name be held in highest
reverence, a name sweeter than honey and more precious than jewels; may
none utter blasphemous words, the sign of a defiled soul, against that
name graced with such dignity and revered for its motherly goodness;
let no one be so bold as to speak a syllable which lacks the respect
due to her name.

49. All, according to their state, should strive to bring alive the
wondrous virtues of our heavenly Queen and most loving Mother through
constant effort of mind and manner. Thus will it come about that all
Christians, in honoring and imitating their sublime Queen and Mother,
will realize they are truly brothers, and with all envy and avarice
thrust aside, will promote love among classes, respect the rights of
the weak, cherish peace. No one should think himself a son of Mary,
worthy of being received under her powerful protection, unless, like
her, he is just, gentle and pure, and shows a sincere desire for true
brotherhood, not harming or injuring but rather helping and comforting
others.

50. In some countries of the world there are people who are unjustly
persecuted for professing their Christian faith and who are deprived of
their divine and human rights to freedom; up till now reasonable
demands and repeated protests have availed nothing to remove these
evils. May the powerful Queen of creation, whose radiant glance
banishes storms and tempests and brings back cloudless skies, look upon
these her innocent and tormented children with eyes of mercy; may the
Virgin, who is able to subdue violence beneath her foot, grant to them
that they may soon enjoy the rightful freedom to practice their
religion openly, so that, while serving the cause of the Gospel, they
may also contribute to the strength and progress of nations by their
harmonious cooperation, by the practice of extraordinary virtues which
are a glowing example in the midst of bitter trials.

51. By this Encyclical Letter We are instituting a feast so that all
may recognize more clearly and venerate more devoutly the merciful and
maternal sway of the Mother of God. We are convinced that this feast
will help to preserve, strengthen and prolong that peace among nations
which daily is almost destroyed by recurring crises. Is she not a
rainbow in the clouds reaching towards God, the pledge of a covenant of
peace?^[79]62

  "Look upon the rainbow, and bless Him that made it; surely it is
  beautiful in its brightness. It encompasses the heaven about with
  the circle of its glory, the hands of the Most High have displayed
  it."^[80]63

Whoever, therefore, reverences the Queen of heaven and earth - and let
no one consider himself exempt from this tribute of a grateful and
loving soul - let him invoke the most effective of Queens, the
Mediatrix of peace; let him respect and preserve peace, which is not
wickedness unpunished nor freedom without restraint, but a well-ordered
harmony under the rule of the will of God; to its safeguarding and
growth the gentle urgings and commands of the Virgin Mary impel us.

52. Earnestly desiring that the Queen and Mother of Christendom may
hear these Our prayers, and by her peace make happy a world shaken by
hate, and may, after this exile show unto us all Jesus, Who will be our
eternal peace and joy, to you, Venerable Brothers, and to your flocks,
as a promise of God's divine help and a pledge of Our love, from Our
heart We impart the Apostolic Benediction.

53. Given at Rome, from Saint Peter's, on the feast of the Maternity of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, the eleventh day of October, 1954, in the
sixteenth year of our Pontificate.
 1. Cf. constitutio apostolica Munificentissirnus Deus: AAS XXXXII
    1950, p. 753 sq. [81]&#8617;
 2. Cf. Iitt. enc. Fulgens corona: AAS XXXXV, 1953, p. 577 sq.
    [82]&#8617;
 3. Cf. AAS XXXVIII, 1946, p. 264 sq. [83]&#8617;
 4. Cf. L'Osservatore Romano, d. 19 Maii, a. 1946. [84]&#8617;
 5. Luc. 1, 32. [85]&#8617;
 6. Isai. IX, 6. [86]&#8617;
 7. Apoc. XIX, 16. [87]&#8617;
 8. Cf. Luc. 1, 32, 33. [88]&#8617;
 9. Luc. 1, 43. [89]&#8617;
10. S. Ephraem, Hymni de B Mana, ed. Th. J. Lamy, t. II, Mechliniae,
    1886, hymn. XIX, p. 624. [90]&#8617;
11. Idem, Oratio ad Ssmam Dei Matrem; Opera omnia, Ed. Assemani, t. III
    (graece), Romae, 1747, pag. 546. [91]&#8617;
12. S. Gregorius Naz., Poemata dogmatica, XVIII, v. 58; PG XXXVII, 485.
    [92]&#8617;
13. Prudentius, Dittochaeum, XXVII: PL LX, 102 A. [93]&#8617;
14. Hom. in S. Lucam, hom. Vll; ed. Rauer, Origenes' Werke, T. IX, p.
    48 (ex catena Marcarii Chrysocephali). Cf. PG XIII, 1902 D.
    [94]&#8617;
15. S. Hieronymus, Liber de nominibus hebraeis: PL XXIII, 886.
    [95]&#8617;
16. S. Petrus Chrysologus, Sermo 142, De Annuntiatione B.M.V.: PL Lll,
    579 C; cf. etiam 582 B; 584 A: "Regina totius exstitit castitatis."
    [96]&#8617;
17. Relatio Epiphanii Ep. Constantin.: PL LXII, 498 D. [97]&#8617;
18. Encomium in Dormitionem Ssmae Deiparae (inter opera S. Modesti): PG
    LXXXVI, 3306 B. [98]&#8617;
19. S. Andreas Cretensis, Homilia II in Dormitionem Ssmae Deiparae: PG
    XCVII, 1079 B. [99]&#8617;
20. Id., Homilia III in Dormitionem Ssmae Deiparae: PG XCVII, 1099 A.
    [100]&#8617;
21. S. Germanus, In Praesentationem Ssmae Deiparae, 1: PG XCVIII, 303
    A. [101]&#8617;
22. Id., In Praesentationem Ssmae Deiparae, n PG XCVIII, 315 C.
    [102]&#8617;
23. S. Ioannes Damascenus, Homilia I in Dormitionem B.M.V.: P.G. XCVI,
    719 A. [103]&#8617;
24. Id., De fide orthodoxa, I, IV, c. 14: PG XLIV, 1158 B. [104]&#8617;
25. De laudibus Mariae (inter opera Venantii Fortunati): PL LXXXVIII,
    282 B et 283 A. [105]&#8617;
26. Ildefonsus Toletanus, De virginitate perpetua B.M.V.: PL XCVI, 58 A
    D. [106]&#8617;
27. S. Martinus 1, Epist. XIV: PL LXXXVII, 199-200 A. [107]&#8617;
28. S. Agatho: PL LXXXVII, 1221 A. [108]&#8617;
29. Hardouin, Acta Conciliorum, IV, 234; 238: PL LXXXIX, 508 B.
    [109]&#8617;
30. Xystus IV, bulla Cum praeexcelsa. d. d. 28 Febr. a. 1476.
    [110]&#8617;
31. Benedictus XIV, bulla Gloriosae Dominae, d. d. 27 Sept. a. 1748.
    [111]&#8617;
32. S. Alfonso, Le glone de Maria, p. I, c. I, 1. [112]&#8617;
33. Ex liturgia Armenorum: in festo Assumptionis, hymnus ad Matutinum.
    [113]&#8617;
34. Ex Menaeo (byzantino): Dominica post Natalem, in Canone, ad
    Matutinum. [114]&#8617;
35. Officium hymni Axathistos (in ritu byzantino). [115]&#8617;
36. Missale Aethiopicum, Anaphora Dominae nostrae Mariae, Matris Dei.
    [116]&#8617;
37. Brev. Rom., Versiculus sexti Respons. [117]&#8617;
38. Festum Assumptionis; hymnus Laudum. [118]&#8617;
39. Ibidem, ad Magnificat 11 Vesp. [119]&#8617;
40. Luc. 1, 32, 33. [120]&#8617;
41. Ibid. 1, 43. [121]&#8617;
42. S. Ioannes Damascenus, De fide orthodoxa, 1. IV, c. 14; PL XCIV,
    1158 s. B. [122]&#8617;
43. I Petr. 1, 18, 19. [123]&#8617;
44. I Cor. Vl, 20. [124]&#8617;
45. Pius Xl, litt. enc. Quas primas: AAS XVII, 1925, p. 599.
    [125]&#8617;
46. Festum septem dolorum B. Mariae Virg., Tractus. [126]&#8617;
47. Eadmerus, De excellentia Virginis Mariae, c. 11: PL CLIX, 508 A B.
    [127]&#8617;
48. F. Suarez, De mysteriis vitae Christi, disp. XXII, sect. 11 (ed
    Vives, XIX, 327). [128]&#8617;
49. S. Irenaeus, Adv. haer., V, 19, 1: PG VII, 1175 B. [129]&#8617;
50. Pius Xl, epist. Auspicatus profecto: AAS XXV, 1933, p. 80.
    [130]&#8617;
51. Pius XII, litt. enc. Mystici Corporis: AAS XXXV, 1943, p. 247.
    [131]&#8617;
52. S. Sophronius, In annuntianone Beatae Mariae Virginis: PG LXXXVII,
    3238 D; 3242 A. [132]&#8617;
53. S. Germanus, Hom. II in dormitione Beatae Mariae Virginis: PG
    XCVIII, 354 B. [133]&#8617;
54. S. Ioannes Damascenus, Hom. I in Dormitionem Beatae Mariae
    Virginis: PG XCVI, 715 A. [134]&#8617;
55. Pius IX, bulla Ineffabilis Deus: Acta Pii IX, I, p. 597-598.
    [135]&#8617;
56. Ibid. p. 618. [136]&#8617;
57. Leo Xlll, litt. enc. Adiumcem populi: ASS, XXVIIl, 1895-1896,p.130.
    [137]&#8617;
58. Pius X, litt enc. Ad diem illum: ASS XXXVI, 1903-1904, p.455.
    [138]&#8617;
59. S. Thomas, Summa Theol., I, q. 25, a. 6, ad 4. [139]&#8617;
60. Pius Xll, litt. enc. Humani generis: AAS XLII, 1950, p. 569.
    [140]&#8617;
61. Ex Brev. Rom.: Festum Assumptionis Beatae Mariae Virginis.
    [141]&#8617;
62. Cf. Gen. IX, 13. [142]&#8617;
63. Eccl. XLIII, 12-13. [143]&#8617;

