____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 16 February 2011 - Saint John of
the Cross

[10]Saint John of the Cross Two weeks ago I presented the figure of the
great Spanish mystic, Teresa of Jesus. Today I would like talk about
another important saint of that country, a spiritual friend of Saint
Teresa, the reformer, with her, of the Carmelite religious family:
Saint John of the Cross. He was proclaimed a Doctor of the Church by
Pope Pius XI in 1926 and is traditionally known as Doctor mysticus,
"Mystical Doctor".

John of the Cross was born in 1542 in the small village of Fontiveros,
near Avila in Old Castille, to Gonzalo de Yepes and Catalina Alvarez.
The family was very poor because his father, Gonzalo, from a noble
family of Toledo, had been thrown out of his home and disowned for
marrying Catalina, a humble silk weaver.

Having lost his father at a tender age, when John was nine he moved
with his mother and his brother Francisco to Medina del Campo, not far
from Valladolid, a commercial and cultural centre. Here he attended the
Colegio de los Doctrinos, carrying out in addition several humble tasks
for the sisters of the Church-Convent of the Maddalena. Later, given
his human qualities and his academic results, he was admitted first as
a male nurse to the Hospital of the Conception, then to the recently
founded Jesuit College at Medina del Campo.

He entered the College at the age of 18 and studied the humanities,
rhetoric and classical languages for three years. At the end of his
formation he had a clear perception of his vocation: the religious
life, and, among the many orders present in Medina, he felt called to
Carmel.

In the summer of 1563 he began his novitiate with the Carmelites in the
town, taking the religious name of Juan de Santo Mat√a. The following
year he went to the prestigious University of Salamanca, where he
studied the humanities and philosophy for three years.

He was ordained a priest in 1567 and returned to Medina del Campo to
celebrate his first Mass surrounded by his family's love. It was
precisely here that John and Teresa of Jesus first met. The meeting was
crucial for them both. Teresa explained to him her plan for reforming
Carmel, including the male branch of the Order, and suggested to John
that he support it "for the greater glory of God". The young priest was
so fascinated by Teresa's ideas that he became a great champion of her
project.

For several months they worked together, sharing ideals and proposals
aiming to inaugurate the first house of Discalced Carmelites as soon as
possible. It was opened on 28 December 1568 at Duruelo in a remote part
of the Province of Avila.

This first reformed male community consisted of John and three
companions. In renewing their religious profession in accordance with
the primitive Rule, each of the four took a new name: it was from this
time that John called himself "of the Cross", as he came to be known
subsequently throughout the world.

At the end of 1572, at Saint Teresa's request, he became confessor and
vicar of the Monastery of the Incarnation in Avila where Teresa of
Jesus was prioress. These were years of close collaboration and
spiritual friendship which enriched both. The most important Teresian
works and John's first writings date back to this period.

Promoting adherence to the Carmelite reform was far from easy and cost
John acute suffering. The most traumatic episode occurred in 1577, when
he was seized and imprisoned in the Carmelite Convent of the Ancient
Observance in Toledo, following an unjust accusation. The Saint,
imprisoned for months, was subjected to physical and moral deprivations
and constrictions. Here, together with other poems, he composed the
well-known Spiritual Canticle. Finally, in the night between 16 and 17
August 1578, he made a daring escape and sought shelter at the
Monastery of Discalced Carmelite Nuns in the town. Saint Teresa and her
reformed companions celebrated his liberation with great joy and, after
spending a brief period recovering, John was assigned to Andalusia
where he spent 10 years in various convents, especially in Granada.

He was charged with ever more important offices in his Order, until he
became vicar provincial and completed the draft of his spiritual
treatises. He then returned to his native land as a member of the
General Government of the Teresian religious family which already
enjoyed full juridical autonomy.

He lived in the Carmel of Segovia, serving in the office of community
superior. In 1591 he was relieved of all responsibility and assigned to
the new religious Province of Mexico. While he was preparing for the
long voyage with 10 companions he retired to a secluded convent near
Ja√©n, where he fell seriously ill.

John faced great suffering with exemplary serenity and patience. He
died in the night between 13 and 14 December 1591, while his confreres
were reciting Matins. He took his leave of them saying: "Today I am
going to sing the Office in Heaven". His mortal remains were translated
to Segovia. He was beatified by Clement X in 1675 and canonized by
Benedict XIII in 1726.

John is considered one of the most important lyric poets of Spanish
literature. His major works are four: The Ascent of Mount Carmel, The
Dark Night, The Spiritual Canticle and The Living Flame of Love.

In The Spiritual Canticle Saint John presents the process of the soul's
purification and that is the gradual, joyful possession of God, until
the soul succeeds in feeling that it loves God with the same love with
which it is loved by him. The Living Flame of Love continues in this
perspective, describing in greater detail the state of the transforming
union with God.

The example that John uses is always that of fire: just as the stronger
the fire burns and consumes wood, the brighter it grows until it blazes
into a flame, so the Holy Spirit, who purifies and "cleanses" the soul
during the dark night, with time illuminates and warms it as though it
were a flame. The life of the soul is a continuous celebration of the
Holy Spirit which gives us a glimpse of the glory of union with God in
eternity.

The Ascent of Mount Carmel presents the spiritual itinerary from the
viewpoint of the gradual purification of the soul, necessary in order
to scale the peaks of Christian perfection, symbolized by the summit of
Mount Carmel. This purification is proposed as a journey the human
being undertakes, collaborating with divine action, to free the soul
from every attachment or affection contrary to God's will.

Purification which, if it is to attain the union of love with God must
be total, begins by purifying the life of the senses and continues with
the life obtained through the three theological virtues: faith, hope
and charity, which purify the intention, the memory and the will.

The Dark Night describes the "passive" aspect, that is, God's
intervention in this process of the soul's "purification". In fact
human endeavour on its own is unable to reach the profound roots of the
person's bad inclinations and habits: all it can do is to check them
but cannot entirely uproot them. This requires the special action of
God which radically purifies the spirit and prepares it for the union
of love with him.

Saint John describes this purification as "passive", precisely because,
although it is accepted by the soul, it is brought about by the
mysterious action of the Holy Spirit who, like a burning flame,
consumes every impurity. In this state the soul is subjected to every
kind of trial, as if it were in a dark night.

This information on the Saint's most important works help us to
approach the salient points of his vast and profound mystical doctrine,
whose purpose is to describe a sure way to attain holiness, the state
of perfection to which God calls us all.

According to John of the Cross, all that exists, created by God, is
good. Through creatures we may arrive at the discovery of the One who
has left within them a trace of himself. Faith, in any case, is the one
source given to the human being to know God as he is in himself, as the
Triune God. All that God wished to communicate to man, he said in Jesus
Christ, his Word made flesh. Jesus Christ is the only and definitive
way to the Father (cf. John 14:6). Any created thing is nothing in
comparison to God and is worth nothing outside him, consequently, to
attain to the perfect love of God, every other love must be conformed
in Christ to the divine love.

From this derives the insistence of Saint John of the Cross on the need
for purification and inner self-emptying in order to be transformed
into God, which is the one goal of perfection. This "purification" does
not consist in the mere physical absence of things or of their use; on
the contrary what makes the soul pure and free is the elimination of
every disorderly dependence on things. All things should be placed in
God as the centre and goal of life.

Of course, the long and difficult process of purification demands a
personal effort, but the real protagonist is God: all that the human
being can do is to "prepare" himself, to be open to divine action and
not to set up obstacles to it. By living the theological virtues, human
beings raise themselves and give value to their commitment. The growth
of faith, hope and charity keeps pace with the work of purification and
with the gradual union with God until they are transformed in him.

When it reaches this goal, the soul is immersed in Trinitarian life
itself, so that Saint John affirms that it has reached the point of
loving God with the same love with which he loves it, because he loves
it in the Holy Spirit.

For this reason the Mystical Doctor maintains that there is no true
union of love with God that does not culminate in Trinitarian union. In
this supreme state the holy soul knows everything in God and no longer
has to pass through creatures in order to reach him. The soul now feels
bathed in divine love and rejoices in it without reserve.

Dear brothers and sisters, in the end the question is: does this Saint
with his lofty mysticism, with this demanding journey towards the peak
of perfection have anything to say to us, to the ordinary Christian who
lives in the circumstances of our life today, or is he an example, a
model for only a few elect souls who are truly able to undertake this
journey of purification, of mystical ascesis?

To find the answer we must first of all bear in mind that the life of
Saint John of the Cross did not "float on mystical clouds"; rather he
had a very hard life, practical and concrete, both as a reformer of the
Order, in which he came up against much opposition and from the
Provincial Superior as well as in his confreres' prison where he was
exposed to unbelievable insults and physical abuse.

His life was hard yet it was precisely during the months he spent in
prison that he wrote one of his most beautiful works. And so we can
understand that the journey with Christ, travelling with Christ, "the
Way", is not an additional burden in our life, it is not something that
would make our burden even heavier but something quite different. It is
a light, a power that helps us to bear it.

If a person bears great love in himself, this love gives him wings, as
it were, and he can face all life's troubles more easily because he
carries in himself this great light; this is faith: being loved by God
and letting oneself be loved by God in Jesus Christ. Letting oneself be
loved in this way is the light that helps us to bear our daily burden.

And holiness is not a very difficult action of ours but means exactly
this "openness": opening the windows of our soul to let in God's light,
without forgetting God because it is precisely in opening oneself to
his light that one finds strength, one finds the joy of the redeemed.

Let us pray the Lord to help us discover this holiness, to let
ourselves be loved by God who is our common vocation and the true
redemption. Many thanks.

