____________________

[8]Magnae Nobis - On Marriage Impediments and Dispensations, by Pope Benedict
XIV, 29 June 1748

1. To the Kingdom of Poland, to the Primate,
Archbishops and Bishops.
Venerable Brothers, Greetings and Apostolic
Benediction.

It was a painful surprise to learn from trustworthy reports and letters
that a certain false opinion had spread in Poland. It is said that some
matrimonial dispensations had been granted and sent out, indeed, that
they are customarily granted and sent out, by this Apostolic See, in
which the canonical impediments for a legitimate and valid marriage are
removed, even though one or both of the contracting parties openly
profess a heretical sect. Since this could only be disseminated by
injustice and intolerable calumny, We would be lacking in our Apostolic
ministry if We did not clarify the constant rule of action in this
matter.

At the same time, We earnestly admonish and beseech all of you and your
subordinates in Poland, a kingdom renowned for its faith and religion,
to read and weigh the letters of matrimonial dispensation which are
sent out by the Apostolic See for the people of that kingdom. We are
certain that if there ever was any sin in this matter, it was not the
fault of this Apostolic See or of its officials; truly it must be
attributed entirely to the Ordinaries of places or to their ministers,
who did not take care either to read or to weigh sufficiently the
letters of dispensation which they received.

Condemnation of Marriages with Heretics

2. Nor is it necessary for us to prove in full the antiquity of the
discipline by which the Apostolic See always condemned the marriage of
Catholics with heretics. But it will be sufficient to bring forward
only some evidence with which We may show that the same discipline and
rule which has been diligently preserved down to our own time
flourishes now, by Us no less religiously preserved. This is what our
predecessor Pope Urban VIII testifies to concerning his own times in
his Apostolic Letters dated December 30, 1624; these may be read in the
book of [10]Cardinal Albitius entitled De inconstantia in Fide, chap.
37, no. 127, where he writes: "Granted that We hold that the marriages
of Catholics with heretics are all-together to be avoided, and, as far
as it depends on us, We aim to keep them far from the Catholic Church."
Also our predecessor Pope Clement XI, in the letters dated June 25,
1706, and found in the collection of his briefs and letters published
in Rome in 1724, expresses himself no less clearly. On page 321 we
read: "We consider it most important not to transgress the rules of the
Church of God, of the Apostolic See, of our predecessors and of the
holy people, all of whom shrink from the marriage of Catholics with
heretics, unless the good of the entire Christian community should
demand it." And in other letters dated July 23, 1707, in the same
collection, page 391: "Indeed the Church shrinks from such marriages
which present so many proofs of deformities and spiritual danger."

3. Our judgment in this matter is sufficiently clear in the Decretal
Rescript published by our authority November 4, 1741, and printed in
volume I of Bullarii nostri, no. 34, sect. 3, as follows: "In the first
place his Holiness grieves very much that some Catholics today are
demented in their base love. They no longer shrink from these
destestable marriages which the Church has always condemned and
forbidden. He praises those bishops who strive to restrain Catholics
from marrying heretics by imposing more severe penalties. Also "He
seriously admonishes all bishops and Vicars Apostolic, parish priests,
missionaries, and other faithful ministers in Holland and [11]Belgium
to frighten away Catholics of both sexes from entering upon such
marriages to the destruction of their souls, and to impede these same
marriages by every good means, and to strive effectively to prevent
them." Further along, concerning a marriage already contracted by a
Catholic party with a heretical partner, we read: "The Catholic spouse,
whether a man or a woman, ought to resolve to do penance for the grave
crime committed, to beg God for pardon, and to strive to bring back to
the Catholic Church the spouse wandering from the true faith and so to
win his soul; this could obtain remission for the crime committed
because, as has already been said, he will be forever bound by the
chain of that marriage."

Heresy Must Be Abjured

4. When a dispensation is requested to allow a Catholic to marry a
heretic or to remove some canonical impediment which exists between the
contracting parties, neither the permission nor the dispensation is
granted except with the addition of this expressed law or condition,
namely that the heresy must first be [12]abjured.

[13]Pope [14]Innocent X was on his guard and ordered that such
dispensations should not be granted at all unless there was proof,
supported by authentic documents, that the heretical fault of the
heterodox contracting party had been rejected under oath; this
testimony was left us by [15]Cardinal Albitius, at that time Assessor
of the Congregation of the Universal Inquisition, in the tractate
mentioned above, De Inconstantia in Fide, chap. 18, no. 44. Clement XI,
in the Congregation of the Holy Office held in his presence on June 16,
1710, ordered the [16]Archbishop of Malines to give no permission or
dispensation for marriages to be celebrated between a contracting
Catholic and a heretic unless the [17]abjuration of heresy had indeed
preceded; he ordered that the theologians who had opinions contrary to
this practice be sharply admonished.

Vicenzo [18]Cardinal Petra recorded this in his Commentary on the
Constitution XII in Suo C of John XXII, Operum, vol. 4, p. 76, no. 14.

5. Some examples are found of Roman Pontiffs who either gave permission
to contract marriages or gave dispensations concerning some impediment,
without the condition of first [19]abjuring heresy. We say first of all
that these concessions were very rare and most of them were granted for
marriages to be contracted among the highest princes, and not without
an urgent and grave cause, a cause which concerned the public welfare.
Besides, opportune safeguards were always added, lest the Catholic
spouse might be perverted by the heretical one; the former would know
that he must strive for the conversion of the latter. In addition,
children of both sexes born of the union must be educated in the
sanctity of the Catholic religion. It is easy then to realize that in
such concessions no opportunity for error was open to the executors
unless they wished knowingly and deliberately to fail in their duty.
Finally, from what We have said so far, it is obvious that the
Apostolic See has always both disapproved and condemned such marriages
unless the [20]abjuration of the heresy preceded; it still abominates
and detests them.

Justification for Dispensation

6. Sometimes the justifications for dispensations are not openly
mentioned in the petitions; the ministers and officials of the Holy See
cannot divine this. Therefore, to silence accusers and calumniators, it
is sufficient to point out that every dispensation is given to a
specified executor, who is to determine the truth of everything in the
deposition. Since he knows that the marriage of Catholic with heretics
is condemned by the Apostolic See, he can also understand that the evil
of heresy, which affects one of the contracting parties and which is
not mentioned in the letters of dispensation, was concealed from the
Apostolic See. It is his duty to suspend the execution of such letters
and to notify the Roman Pontiff and his officials of the reason for the
suspension, as Pope Alexander III prescribed in his letter to the
[21]Archbishop of [22]Ravenna.

This was entered in the Codex of Decretals to insure its perpetual
effect, in the chapter Si quando, de Rescriptis, where we read:
"Diligently consider the nature of this business and either comply with
Our orders or by your letter explain the reasonable cause which
prevents you; for if you do not, We will maintain what was suggested to
Us by an evil report."

Presumption that Both Parties are Catholic

7. In truth the circumspection of the Apostolic See and its officials
does not stop here. Sometimes when a dispensation to remove some
canonical impediment for a reasonable cause is requested it comes from
a region in which Catholics live together with heretics. When it is not
certain from other sources whether both of the petitioners or only one
of them is Catholic, the above Pontifical officials always presume both
to be Catholics. Therefore they set forth their wishes in a little book
(called Supplicationum) to which the Papal signature is applied: "The
afore-said petitioners, who are truly members of the orthodox faith and
live under obedience to the Holy Roman Catholic Church, and intend so
to live and die, etc." These words agree with others which are added in
provisional and conditional form, namely: "Provided the petitioners
mentioned are truly worshipers of the orthodox faith, and live in
obedience to the Holy Roman Church and intend so to live and die."

8. Considering the above, We ask: when letters of matrimonial
dispensation are conceived in such words and sent in that way, if later
it is learned that the contracting parties are heretics, or one of them
is Catholic and the other heretic, and nevertheless the dispensation is
executed, whose fault is it and who can be accused of issuing an
improper dispensation? Is it he who in good faith has granted it after
applying opportune safeguards and adding legitimate conditions; or is
it not rather he who, without regard for such conditions and with no
previous examination of the contracting parties, executes the
dispensation and permits it to have an undue effect contrary to the
will of the one granting it?

Girls Less Than Twelve Years Old

9. But some one may object that not all dispensations sent out for
execution were armed with such clauses; for in the kindgom of Poland
itself, not many years ago, a certain dispensation was sent from Rome
which did not display any conditions of this kind. The dispensation
concerned age in favor of a girl who was six months short of 12 years,
which is the legal age for girls to enter matrimony. In the concession
it was explained that "craft complemented age so that legally she could
contract marriage." Hence it should be considered a declaratory
document rather than a dispensation, since the faculty of contracting
marriage before the time prescribed, as often as craft supplies for
age, comes from the very provisions of the law and canons. Indeed the
bishops themselves and the ordinaries of places may decide on this
question, which is one of fact: whether indeed craft, as is stated, has
supplied for age. Consequently they have the authority to give
permission to contract marriage. It is not necessary to appeal to the
Apostolic See, except for greater solemnity of the act or "lest there
might arise some question of the validity of such a marriage on the
score of insufficient age," as the formula which is customarily used in
declaratory letters concerning insufficient age states. Indeed
canonists teach that there is an extraneous right of the Apostolic See
and of ordinary judges to decide in this matter, whether indeed craft,
as is asserted, may supply for age. But only the Holy See has the right
of granting a dispensation to contract marriage to a minor, who is not
yet mature for conjugal union, but has attained that use of reason
sufficient to understand its purpose and nature. Indeed for the
validity of matrimony, just as natural and divine law requires the use
of reason, so positive canon law requires the natural power of conjugal
union. The Roman Pontiff is above canon law, but any bishop is inferior
to that law and consequently cannot modify it.

10. But let us pass over the question of whether permission to contract
a marriage before the legal age, when craft supplies for age, is
properly called a dispensation or rather has the force of a
declaration, and therefore whether it ought to be classified as an act
of grace or of justice. When one of the contracting parties or both are
infected with heresy, and this is not mentioned in the application and
could not be known in any other way, the apostolic letters granted in
this matter lack those words and conditions which are customarily added
to other dispensations. Let us see nevertheless whether others of equal
force are present by which the executor of such letters should abstain
from executing them. There can be no doubt about this, however, if we
refer to what was required of the executor in such letters, "that he
inform himself diligently about the premises" and see "whether it is
really and legitimately obvious in such a minor that craft does supply
for the defect in age." The same executor is commissioned to permit the
applicant to marry "provided there is no other canonical impediment to
contracting matrimony with a person legally free to marry, or with a
person to whom an Apostolic dispensation has been granted, according to
the norms of the Council of Trent." These words surely indicate that he
should be no means permit a minor to enjoy such a dispensation or
declaration if he learns that the minor was planning to marry a
heretic.

11. But our discussion has been longer than We intended at the
beginning of our letters. We do not at all regret this. We are
concerned that the truth about facts and events be known and that false
rumors spread against the sacred Chair of Peter do not find credence.
If anything is done anywhere against the sacred canons, may the fault
not be ascribed to the innocent.

12. But that the end of Our letters may return to where they began; to
you, venerable brothers, and to the other ordinary bishops of that
kingdom, We again earnestly command that you and your respective
officials study the Apostolic Letters of dispensation which are sent to
you for execution; certainly, if you find anything in them abnormal and
of a new kind, you should look into its truth or falsity. There is much
malice among men on earth, nor is it given us to know to what lengths
the audacity of deceitful men can go. Indeed it has come to our ears
that someone, disregarding the impediment of grade, married a heretical
man to a Catholic woman; afterwards when he learned that his deed was
open to criticism, he did not hesitate to assert that he was justified
in this matter by an Apostolic dispensation which he had received from
Rome. When, however, he was called upon to produce such letters of
dispensation, he was never able to do so, since, in fact, he had never
received them.

13. Truly We believe that such a detestable crime as this could not
have been committed in the midst of the renowned nation of the Polish
people, which We embrace with paternal love. Nor could the bishops of
that kingdom, all of whom together and individually We hold in great
honor, have participated in this. To you, however, venerable brothers,
and to the flock committed to you, We bestow the Apostolic Benediction
from the depths of our soul.

Given at Rome at Saint Peter's, [23]29 June 1748, in the eighth year of
Our Pontificate.

