____________________

[8]Pope Gregory II - Invests Boniface with Episcopal Authority, 1 December
722

1. Gregory, the servant of the servants of God, to the
clergy and people [of Thuringia], greeting in the Lord.

Acceding without delay to your praiseworthy desire, we have raised our
colleague Boniface to the episcopal dignity. We have commanded him not
to ordain a man who has been married twice or one who has married a
woman not a virgin, or one who is not fully instructed, or a man
suffering from a physical defect, or who is notorious for a crime
whether civil or ecclesiastical, or who is known to be subject to some
liability. If he finds such persons in office he shall not advance
them. Under no circumstance whatsoever should he accept Africans who
dare to apply for admission to ecclesiastical orders, because some of
them are Manichaeans and others are known to have received Baptism
several times. He shall endeavour not to diminish but rather to
increase the services and adornments of the churches and whatsoever
endowments they possess. He is to divide the revenue and the offerings
of the faithful into four parts: one for himself, another to the clergy
for their ministrations, a third to the poor and pilgrims, and a fourth
for the fabric of the churches, for all of which he must render an
account at the judgment seat of God. The ordination of priests and
deacons is to take place only at the quarter tenses of April, July and
October and at the beginning of Lent. Baptism must be conferred only at
Easter and Whitsuntide, except in the case of those who are in danger
of death, for otherwise they might perish eternally.

As long as he continues to carry out the injunctions of this our see
you are to show him unquestioning obedience, that the body of the
Church may be without blame and in perfect peace, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, who liveth and reigneth with Almighty God and the Holy Spirit
for ever and ever.

May God preserve you from all harm, beloved sons.

Given on the kalends of December in the seventh year of the reign of
our august Lord, Leo, by the grace of God crowned emperor, in the
fourth year of his son Constantine the Great, the sixth indiction.

