____________________

[8]Coelestis Pastor - Condemning the Errors of Miguel de Molinos, by Pope
Innocent XI, 20 November 1687

1. In order
to free the world, prostrate in darkness and bound by numerous pagan
errors, from the power of the devil who held it a wretched prisoner
after the fall of our first parent, the heavenly shepherd, Christ our
Lord, by his ineffable mercy, condescended to take flesh and, as a
living victim, offer himself to God for us on the wood of the cross,
nailing the guarantee of our redemption to the wood of the cross as a
proof of his love for us. Then before returning to heaven he left on
earth the Catholic Church his bride, as a new city, a holy Jerusalem,
coming down from heaven without wrinkle or spot, one and holy,
protected by his mighty weapons against the gates of hell. Its
government he entrusted to the prince of the apostles, Peter, and his
successors; they are to preserve whole and entire the teaching drawn
from his lips, lest the sheep redeemed by his precious blood feed on
poisonous ideas and fall back into age-old errors. This power sacred
Scripture teaches us he entrusted especially to blessed Peter. For to
which of the apostles but Peter did he say: "Feed my sheep." And again:
"I have prayed for you that your faith may not fail; and when once you
have turned, strengthen your brothers." Therefore, we who occupy
Peter's throne and possess power equal to his, not by our own merits
but because of almighty God's inscrutable wisdom, steadfastly desire
that the Christian people embrace that faith proclaimed by Christ our
Lord through his apostles in a continuous and uninterrupted tradition;
the faith which he promised will endure to the end of the world.

Recently it has been brought to the attention of our apostolic
office that a certain Miguel de Molinos, under pretext of the prayer of
quiet, but actually at variance with the teaching and practice of the
holy fathers from the very beginnings, was teaching false doctrines by
word and writings, and in practice was following them; these doctrines
were leading the faithful from true religion and from the purity of
Christian piety into terrible errors and every indecency. Therefore,
since we have always been deeply concerned that the souls of the
faithful committed to us by God will arrive safely at the hoped-for
harbor of salvation by being kept free from such depraved errors, we
have ordered, after legitimate investigation, the aforesaid Molinos put
in prison. Then in person and in the presence of our honorable
brothers, cardinals of the holy Roman Church who had been especially
assigned as general inquisitors throughout Christendom, we consulted a
number of masters of sacred theology and received their judgment in
word and writing, and weighed it carefully. Even imploring the
assistance of the Holy Spirit, we have determined to condemn, with the
unanimous consent of these our brothers, the following propositions of
this same Molinos. He had acknowledged these propositions as his own
and had been convicted for dictating, writing, disseminating, and
holding them, or had acknowledged his guilt, as is more fully explained
in the judicial procedures and verdict issued by our mandate of 28
August 1687.

The Propositions:

1. It is necessary that man reduce his own powers to nothingness, and
this is the interior way.

2. To wish to operate actively is to offend God, who wishes to be
himself the sole agent; and therefore it is necessary to abandon
oneself wholly in God and thereafter to continue in existence as an
inanimate body.

3. Vows about doing something are impediments to perfection.

4. Natural activity is the enemy of grace, and impedes the operations
of God and true perfection, because God wishes to operate in us without
us.

5. By doing nothing the soul annihilates itself and returns to its
beginning and to its origin, which is the essence of God, in which it
remains transformed and divinized, and God then remains in himself,
because then the two things are no more united, but are one alone, and
in this manner God lives and reigns in us, and the soul annihilates
itself in operative being.

6. The interior way is that in which neither light, nor love, nor
resignation is recognized, and it is not necessary to understand God,
and in this way one makes progress correctly.

7. A soul ought to consider neither the reward, nor punishment, nor
paradise, nor hell, nor death, nor eternity.

8. He ought not to wish to know whether he is progressing according to
the will of God, or whether or not with the same resigned will he
stands still; nor is it necessary that he wish to know his own state or
his own nothingness; but he ought to remain as an inanimate body.

9. The soul ought not to remember either itself, or God, or anything
whatsoever, and in the interior life all reflection is harmful, even
reflection upon its human actions and upon its own defects.

10. If one scandalizes others by one's own defects, it is not necessary
to reflect, as long as the will to scandalize is not present; not to be
able to reflect upon one's own defects, is a grace of God.

11. It is not necessary to reflect upon doubts as to whether one is
proceeding rightly or not.

12. He who gives his own free will to God should care about nothing,
neither about hell, nor about heaven; neither ought he to have a desire
for his own perfection, nor for virtues, nor his own sanctity, nor his
own salvation-the hope of which he ought to remove.

13. After our free will has been resigned to God, reflection and care
about everything of our own must be left to that same God, and we ought
to leave it to him, so that he may work his divine will in us without
us.

14. It is not seemly that he who is resigned to the divine will, ask
anything of God; because asking is an imperfection, since the act is of
one's own will and election, and this is wishing that the divine will
be conformed to ours, and not that ours be conformed to the divine; and
this from the Gospel: "Seek and you shall find," was not said by Christ
for interior souls who do not wish to have free will; nay indeed, souls
of this kind reach this state, that they cannot seek anything from God.

15. Just as they ought not ask anything from God, so should they not
give thanks to him for anything, because either is an act of their own
will.

16. It is not proper to seek indulgences for punishment due to one's
own sins, because it is better to satisfy divine justice than to seek
divine mercy, since the latter proceeds from pure love of God, and the
former from an interested love of ourselves, and that is not a thing
pleasing to God and meritorious, because it is a desire to shun the
cross.

17. When free will has been surrendered to God, and the care and
thought of our soul left to the same God, no consideration of
temptations need any longer be of concern; neither should any but a
negative resistance be made to them, with the application of no energy,
and if nature is aroused, one must let it be aroused, because it is
nature.

18. He who in his prayer uses images, figures, pretension, and his own
conceptions, does not adore God "in spirit and in truth."

19. He who loves God in the way which reason points out or the
intellect comprehends, does not love the true God.

20. To assert that in prayer it is necessary to help oneself by
discourse and by reflections, when God does not speak to the soul, is
ignorance. God never speaks; his way of speaking is operation, and he
always operates in the soul when this soul does not impede him by its
discourses, reflections, and operations.

21. In prayer it is necessary to remain in obscure and universal faith,
with quiet and forgetfulness of any particular and distinct thought of
the attributes of God and the Trinity, and thus to remain in the
presence of God for adoring and loving him and serving him, but without
producing acts, because God has no pleasure in these.

22. This knowledge through faith is not an act produced by a creature,
but it is a knowledge given by God to the creature, which the creature
neither recognizes that he has, and neither later knows that he had it;
and the same is said of love. 23. The mystics with St. Bernard in the
Scala Claustralium (The Ladder of the Recluses) distinguished four
steps: reading, meditation, prayer, and infused contemplation. He who
always remains in the first, never passes over to the second. He who
always persists in the second, never arrives at the third, which is our
acquired contemplation, in which one must persist throughout all life,
provided that God does not draw the soul (without the soul expecting
it) to infused contemplation; and if this ceases, the soul should turn
back to the third step and remain in that, without returning again to
the second or first.

24. Whatever thoughts occur in prayer, even impure, or against God, the
saints, faith, and the sacraments, if they are not voluntarily
nourished, nor voluntarily expelled, but tolerated with indifference
and resignation, do not impede the prayer of faith; indeed they make it
more perfect, because the soul then remains more resigned to the divine
will.

25. Even if one becomes sleepy and falls asleep, nevertheless there is
prayer and actual contemplation, because prayer and resignation,
resignation and prayer are the same, and while resignation endures,
prayer also endures.

26. The three ways: the purgative, illuminative, and unitive, are the
greatest absurdity ever spoken about in mystical (theology), since
there is only one way, namely, the interior way.

27. He who desires and embraces sensible devotion does not desire nor
seek God, but himself; and anyone who walks by the interior way, in
holy places as well as on feast days, acts badly when he desires it and
tries to possess it.

28. Weariness for spiritual matters is good, if indeed by it one's own
love is purified.

29. As long as the interior soul disdains discourses about God,
disdains the virtues, and remains cold, feeling no fervor in himself,
it is a good sign.

30. Everything sensible which we experience in the spiritual life, is
abominable, base, and unclean.

31. No meditative person exercises true interior virtues; these should
not be recognized by the senses. It is necessary to abandon the
virtues.

32. Neither before nor after communion is any other preparation or act
of thanksgiving required for these interior souls than continuance in a
customary passive resignation, because in a more perfect way it
supplies all acts of virtues, which can be practiced and are practiced
in the ordinary way. And, if on this occasion of communion there arise
emotions of humility, of petition, or of thanksgiving, they are to be
repressed, as often as it is not discerned that they are from a special
impulse of God; otherwise they are impulses of nature not yet dead.

33. That soul acts badly which proceeds by this interior way, if it
wishes on feast days by any particular effort to excite some sensible
devotion in itself, since for an interior soul all days are equal, all
festal. And the same is said of holy places, because to souls of this
kind all places are alike.

34. To give thanks to God by words and by speech is not for interior
souls which ought to remain in silence, placing no obstacle before God,
because he operates in them; and the more they resign themselves to
God, they discover that they cannot recite the Lord's prayer, i.e., Our
Father.

35. It is not fitting for souls of this interior life to perform works,
even virtuous ones, by their own choice and activity; otherwise they
would not be dead. Neither should they elicit acts of love for the
Blessed Virgin, saints, or the humanity of Christ, because since they
are sensible objects, so, too, is their love toward them.

36. No creature, neither the Blessed Virgin nor the saints, ought to
abide in our heart, because God alone wishes to occupy and possess it.

37. On occasion of temptations, even violent ones, the soul ought not
to elicit explicit acts of opposite virtues, but should persevere in
the above mentioned love and resignation.

38. The voluntary cross of mortifications is a heavy weight and
fruitless, and therefore to be dismissed.

39. The more holy works and penances, which the saints performed, are
not enough to remove from the soul even a single tie.

40. The Blessed Virgin never performed any exterior work, and
nevertheless was holier than all the saints. Therefore, one can arrive
at sanctity without exterior work.

41. God permits and wishes to humiliate us and to conduct us to a true
transformation, because in some perfect souls, even though not
inspired, the demon inflicts violence on their bodies and makes them
commit carnal acts, even in wakefulness and without the bewilderment of
the mind, by physically moving their hands and other members against
their wills. And the same is said as far as concerns other actions
sinful in themselves, in which case they are not sins, but in them
(because with these) the consent is not present.

42. A case may be given, that things of this kind contrary to the will
result in carnal acts at the same time on the part of two persons, for
example man and woman, and on the part of both an act follows.

43. God in past ages has created saints through the ministry of
tyrants; now in truth he produces saints through the ministry of
demons, who, by causing the aforesaid things contrary to the will,
bring it about that they despise themselves the more and annihilate and
resign themselves to God.

