____________________

[8]Pope Gregory IX - Mira circa nos - Bull of Canonization of Saint Francis
of Assisi, 14 August 1228

[9]Pope Gregory IX 1. How wondrously considerate of us is God's pity!
How priceless a love of charity which would sacrifice a Son to redeem a
slave! God neither neglected the gifts of his mercy nor failed to
protect uninterruptedly the vineyard planted by his hand. He sent
laborers into it at the eleventh hour to cultivate it, and with their
hoes and plowshares to uproot the thorns and thistles, as did Samgar
when he killed 600 Philistines (Judges 3: 31). After the copious
branches were pruned and the sucker roots with the briars were pulled
out, this vineyard will produce a luscious, appetizing fruit, one
capable of storage in the wine cellar of eternity, once purified in the
wine-press of patience. Wickedness had indeed blazed like fire, and the
human heart had grown cold, so as to destroy the wall surrounding this
vineyard, just as the attacking Philistines were destroyed by the
poison of worldly pleasures.

2. Behold how the Lord, when he destroyed the earth by water, saved the
just man with a contemptible piece of wood (Wis. 10:4), did not allow
the scepter of the ungodly to fall upon the lot of the just (Ps 124:3).
Now, at the eleventh hour, he has called forth his servant, Blessed
Francis, a man after his own heart (1 Sam 13: 14). This man was a
light, despised by the rich, nonetheless prepared for the appointed
moment. Him the Lord sent into his vineyard to uproot the thorns and
thistles. God cast down this lamp before the attacking Philistines,
thus illumining his own land and with earnest exhortation warning it to
be reconciled with God.

3. On hearing within his soul his friend's voice of invitation Francis
without hesitation arose, and as another Samson strengthened by God's
grace, shattered the fetters of a flattering world. Filled with the
zeal of the Spirit and seizing the jawbone of an ass, he conquered not
only a thousand, but many thousands of Philistines (Judges 15: 15-16)
by his simple preaching, unadorned with the persuasive words of human
wisdom (1 Cor 1:17), and made forceful by the power of God, who chooses
the weak of this world to confound the strong (I Cor 1:17). With the
help of God he accomplished this: God who touches mountains and they
smoke (Ps 103:32), so bringing to spiritual service those who were once
slaves to the allurements of the flesh. For those who died to sin and
live only for God and not for themselves (namely, whose worse part has
died), there flowed from this jawbone an abundant stream of water:
refreshing, cleansing, rendering fruitful the fallen, downtrodden and
thirsty. This river of water reaching unto eternal life (Jn 7: 38),
might be purchased without silver and without cost (Is 55:1), and like
branches far and wide its rivulets watered the vineyard whose branches
extended unto the sea and its boughs unto the river (Ps 79:12).

4. After the example of our father Abraham, this man forgot not only
his country and acquaintances, but also his father's house, to go to a
land which the Lord had shown him by divine inspiration (Gen 12).
Pushing aside any obstacle he pressed on to win the prize of his
heavenly call (Phil. 3:14). Conforming himself to Him (Rom 8:29) who,
though rich, for our sake became poor (2 Cor 8:9), he unburdened
himself of a heavy load of material possessions so as to pass easily
through the narrow gate (Mt 7:13). He disbursed his wealth to the poor,
so that his justice might endure forever (Ps 111:9).

Nearing the land of vision he offered his own body as a holocaust to
the Lord upon one of the mountains indicated to him (Gen 22:2), the
mountain which is the excellence of faith. His flesh, which now and
then had tricked him, he sacrificed as Jephte his only daughter (Judges
11:34), lighting under it the fire of love, punishing it with hunger,
thirst, cold, nakedness and with many fasts and vigils. When it had
been crucified with its vices and concupiscences (Gal 5:24), he could
say with the Apostle: "I live now, not I, but Christ lives in me" (Gal
2:20). For he really did not live for himself any longer, but rather
for Christ, who died for our sins and rose for our justification (Rom
4:25), that we might no longer be slaves to sin (Rom 6:6).

Uprooting his vices and like Jacob arising at the Lord's command (Gen
35:1-11) he renounced wife and farm and oxen and all which might
distract those invited to the great feast (Lk 14:15-20), and took up
the battle with the world, the flesh and the spiritual forces of
wickedness on high. And as he had received the sevenfold grace of the
Spirit and the help of the eight [10]beatitudes of the Gospel, he
journeyed to Bethel, the house of God, on a path which he had traced in
the fifteen steps of the virtues mystically represented in the Psalter
(gradual Psalms). After he had made of his heart an altar for the Lord,
he offered upon it the incense of devout prayers to be taken up to the
Lord at the hands of angels whose company he would soon join.

5. But that he might not be the only one to enjoy the blessings of the
mountain, clinging exclusively to the embraces of Rachel, as it were to
a life of contemplation lovely but sterile, he descended to the
forbidden house of Leah to lead into the desert the flock fertile with
twins (Cant 4:2) and seeking pastures of life Gen 29). There, where the
manna of heavenly sweetness restores all who have been separated from
the noisy world, he would be seated with the princes of his people and
crowned with the crown of justice. Sowing his seed in tears, he would
come back rejoicing carrying his sheaves to the storehouse of eternity
(Ps 125:5-6).

Surely he sought not his own interests (Phil 2:21), but those of
Christ, serving Him zealously like the proverbial bee. As the morning
star in the midst of a cloud, and as the moon at the full (Eccles.
50,6), he took in his hands a lamp with which to draw the humble by the
example of his glorious deeds, and a trumpet wherewith to recall the
shameless with stern and fearsome warnings from their wicked abandon.

Thus strengthened by charity he courageously took possession of the
Midianite camp (Judges 7:16-22), that is, the camp of those who
contemptuously disregard the teaching of the Church, with the support
of Him who encompassed the whole world by His authority, even while
still cloistered in the Virgin's womb. He captured the weapons on which
the well-armed man trusted while guarding his house and parceling out
his spoils (Lk 11:21-22), and he led captivity captive in submission to
Jesus Christ (Eph 4:8).

6. After defeating the threefold earthly enemy, he did violence to the
kingdom of heaven and seized it by force (Mt 11:12). After many
glorious battles in this life he triumphed over the world, and he who
was knowingly unlettered and wisely foolish, happily returned to the
Lord to take the first place before many others more learned.

7. Plainly a life such as his, so holy, so passionate, so brilliant,
was enough to win him a place in the Church Triumphant. Yet, because
the Church Militant, which can only observe the outer appearances, does
not presume to judge on its own authority those not sharing its actual
state, it proposes for veneration as Saints only those whose lives on
earth merited such, especially because an angel of Satan sometimes
transforms himself into an angel of light (II Cor 11:14). In his
generosity the omnipotent and merciful God has provided that the
aforementioned Servant of Christ did come and serve Him worthily and
commendably. Not permitting so great a light to remain hidden under a
bushel, but wishing to put it on a lampstand to console those dwelling
in the house of light (Mt 5:15), God declared through many brilliant
miracles that his life has been acceptable to God and his memory should
be honored by the Church Militant.

8. Therefore, since the wondrous events of his glorious life are quite
well known to us because of the great familiarity he had with us while
we still occupied a lower rank, and since we are fully convinced by
reliable witnesses of the many brilliant miracles, we and the flock
entrusted to us, by the mercy of God, are confident of being assisted
at his intercession and of having in heaven a patron whose friendship
we enjoyed on earth. With the consultation and approval of our
Brothers, we have decreed that he be enrolled in the catalogue of
saints worthy of veneration.

9. We decree that his birth be celebrated worthily and solemnly by the
universal Church on the fourth of October, the day on which he entered
the kingdom of heaven, freed from the prison of the flesh.

10. Hence, in the Lord we beg, admonish and exhort all of you, we
command you by this apostolic letter, that on this day reserved to
honor his memory, you dedicate yourselves more intensely to the divine
praises, and humbly to implore his patronage, so that through his
intercession and merits you might be found worthy of joining his
company with the help of Him who is blessed forever. Amen.

Given at Perugia, on the fourteenth calends of August, in the second
year of our pontificate.

