____________________

[8]Cum Summi - Proclaiming a Universal Jubilee, by Pope Clement XIV, 12
December 1769

[9]Pope Clement XIV To Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs and Primates
Concerning the Universal Jubilee. Venerable Brothers, Greetings and
Apostolic Blessing.

1. When We contemplate Our position and consider the gravity of its
burden, We are deeply disturbed both because of the magnitude of the
task itself and the weakness of Our resources. We seem to have been
called into the depths of the sea from the peace of a quiet life as if
from a most safe harbor to rule the bark of blessed Peter, to be shaken
by great floods and to be all but submerged by the force of the
tempest. Truly this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our
eyes. It was not because of human counsel but rather by His inscrutable
judgment that such a care had been unexpectedly laid upon Us.
Therefore, we are buoyed up by a certain hope that He who has chosen Us
will, Himself remove Our fear, and infirmity and will hear Us in the
depths of the storm. The memory of Peter trembling in the sea and of
the Lord reproving his little faith will confirm Us in the same trust.
Surely He wishes Us to put aside all doubt about obtaining His help and
to act with the hope of His grace, rather than from fear of Our
weakness. Therefore, We obey His will, and We hand Ourselves over to
His faithfulness and power. For if He has decided to aid Our labors in
the present circumstances for the safety of His Church, everyone will
surely perceive Him alone as its author and source; hence they will
realize that the honor and glory must be given to Him alone. Therefore,
We proceed eagerly to undertake this great burden, and We will strive
to trust in His powerful help. We will consider no care too great in
carrying out our task.

2. When We ponder the nature of Our administration and look to all
regions of the Christian world, We behold you in your exalted posts. We
are refreshed by your presence; We recognize that you are Our helpers,
the custodians of the Lord's flock and laborers in the evangelical
vineyard. Therefore at the beginning of Our apostolate, We wish to
address you. If We seem in any way to exhort and reprove you, attribute
it to Our fear for Ourselves or consider that it comes for Our
confidence in your virtue and devotion to Us.

3. First of all, We beseech you never to cease imploring God to
strengthen Us. Return Our love for you, and thus join the mutual aid of
your prayers with Us so that we may sustain each other. By doing this,
you will confirm your unity with Us. For, to be sure, the edifice of
the whole church is one, whose foundation was placed by blessed Peter
in this See. Many stones are joined for its construction, but all rest
on one rock. One is the body of the church, whose head is Christ, and
all cohere in it. We vicariously administer His power and preside over
others by His will. You and We are the more prominent members of the
same body. For, what can happen to individual members which does not
affect all or pervade each? Accordingly, whatever concerns you concerns
Us, and vice versa. Therefore, together we must all labor for the
health and safety of the church, so that, without blemish or strain, it
may flourish. With God's help we can accomplish this if each of you is
enkindled by as strong a zeal for his flock as possible and if your one
concern be to remove from his flock all contagion of evil and pitfalls
of error and to strengthen it diligently with all the aids of sound
doctrine and holiness.

4. If ever those in charge of the Lord's vineyard should be concerned
about the salvation of souls, they must be so in this age especially.
For many ideas aimed at weakening religion arise almost daily. When men
are enticed by novelty and led on by an eagerness for alien knowledge,
they come together more eagerly for this very purpose and more
willingly embrace it. Wherefore, We lament that the destruction of
souls is propagated more widely each day. Accordingly you must work all
the harder and exercise diligence and authority to repel this audacity
and insanity which stalks even divine and most holy matters. Be
confident that you will accomplish this by simplicity of sound doctrine
and by the word of God which penetrates more than any two-edged sword.
You will easily be able to contain the attack of enemies and blunt
their weapons when in all your sermons you preach and present Jesus
Christ crucified. By His own laws and institutions He founded and
reenforced this holy city which is His Church. To it he entrusted, as
it were, the deposit of faith in Him to be preserved piously and
without contamination. He wished it to be the bulwark of His teaching
and truth against which the gates of hell would never prevail. We,
therefore, the overseers and guardians of this holy city, must preserve
the magnificent heritage of Our laws and faith which has been passed
down intact to Us; We must transmit it pure and sound to our
successors. If We direct all our actions to this norm found in sacred
scripture and moreover cling to the footsteps of our ancestors, We will
be best equipped to avoid whatever could weaken and destroy the faith
of the Christian people and loosen in any way the unity of the Church.

5. Whatever pertains to religious worship, to moral training, to right
living can be found in the two fold instrument of scriptures and
tradition. From this source we learn the depth of mysteries and the
duties of piety, honesty, justice, and humanity. We learn, thus, what
we owe to God, to the Church, to our country, our fellow citizens, and
all other men. From no other source than these laws of true religion do
we recognize more clearly the established rights of citizens and
society. Accordingly, no one has ever attacked the divine sanctions of
Christ without likewise disturbing public tranquillity, without
lessening obedience owed to rulers, and without rendering everything
unsafe and uncertain. For there is a strong bond between divine and
human rights; therefore those who realize that rulers are protected by
the authority of the Christian law, obey them, venerate their
authority, and protect and cherish their dignity.

6. Therefore, We exhort that after God and the Church, you concern
yourselves with instilling in people obedience and deference to rulers.
For they protect public safety and enforce the equity of law. They are
ministers of God and not without reason do they carry the sword as
vindicators in wrath on him who does wrong; moreover they are beloved
sons and patrons of the Church, whose part it is to cherish it like a
parent and protect its interest and rights. Let your followers learn
from the cradle itself to maintain their loyalty to rulers, to obey
authority, and to venerate the law not only because of fear, but also
because of conscience. This will benefit both the tranquillity of civic
life and also the profit of the church, for these cannot be separated.
To this end, add to the daily prayers for your people certain special
petitions for the rulers, that they may be kept safe and that they may
rule in equity, peace, and justice, so that recognizing God himself
ruling in the kingdom of men, they may protect and advance His cause.
Thus, you will satisfy your episcopal task no less than the well-being
of all.

7. As for the rest, we consider it superfluous to review with you the
other aspects of your pastoral office in any detail. For why should We
pursue details and exhort you in matters you clearly know and of which,
moreover, you have the added advantage of day-to-day experience and a
spiritual outlook fully consonant with your function? One thing only We
will mention: try to follow the example of our Leader and the Chief of
the apostles in all things, and to exemplify in yourselves that model
of holiness, charity, and humility. For if Christ, assuming the
weakness of our flesh, wished that men reclaimed by His humility and
love become adoptive sons of God and His coheirs, then what can be
better than for Us to preserve this union of men with Christ, and to
ourselves as an example to all? For what other reason is there for him
who preaches the gospel for Sion to climb a high mountain? If once you
are inflamed with this desire, then this same ardor will spread among
all your people. Indeed the force and authority of the pastor for
moving the spirits of his flock is truly marvellous. For when they
recognize that all his thoughts and actions are conformed to this model
of true virtue, when they see in him nothing harsh, nothing arrogant,
and nothing exalted, but rather charity, meekness, and humility, then
truly they will feel themselves drawn most keenly to imitate these
qualities. Moreover, when they see him paying no attention to private
gain, instead serving the advantage of everyone else, coming to the aid
of the needy with his resources, of the afflicted with his consolation,
of the ignorant with his teaching, of all men with his service, advice
and piety, even preferring their salvation to his life, they will
listen to his voice as he teaches, exhorts, implores, and even blames
and reproves in a most loving manner. For if pastors are hampered by
private interests and prefer worldly things to heavenly, how can they
rouse others to love of God and mutual kindness? If they seek after
wealth, pleasure, honors, how can they rouse others to the contempt of
human things? If they are puffed up with pride and arrogance, how can
they rouse others to meekness and humility? Therefore, since you have
taken upon yourselves the office of instructing souls in the knowledge
of Jesus Christ, you must adhere to his holiness, innocence, and
gentleness. Consider, too, that your proper business, is to instruct
the people in this fashion, and that by carrying out this task
correctly will come all your praise and good fortune, from neglecting
it, your calamity and turpitude. Therefore, seek only those riches that
come from gaining souls for Christ. Seek only that glory which comes
from promoting divine worship, from adding to the beauty of the house
of God, and from extirpating vice and promoting virtue.

8. Not even when you have been long and much tried in these labors
should you think that there will ever be a limit to practicing virtue.
To be sure, it is the condition of your office, the nature of the
episcopal life, never to be free from cares or to attain leisure. But
the expectation of the immortal and infinite reward awaiting you will
lighten all troubles. Moreover, in addition to this hope of
immortality, you will experience abundant joy even in sustaining the
labors of the pastoral life, when you behold your people joined with
the mutual bonds of charity, honesty, and piety and when you behold all
the other outstanding fruits of your vigilance and toils gained for the
Church. Would that We might see that splendid felicity of religion of
ancient days returned to the Church in this time of Our apostolate as a
result of the unanimous accord of all our wills and labors.

9. At the same time as We send this Encyclical to you, Venerable
Brothers, We also send another to all the faithful announcing the
customary Jubilee for imploring divine aid for a salutary governance of
the holy Catholic Church at the beginning of Our pontificate. Direct
your people to properly perform these prayers in faith, piety,
and-humility and inspire them to care for their salvation as well as
the general welfare of the Christian people.

10. As a pledge of Our love We impart the apostolic blessing to you,
Venerable Brothers, and the faithful of your churches.

Given in Rome at Saint Mary Major, 12 December 1769, in the 1st year of
Our pontificate.

