____________________

[8]Decet Quam Maxime - On Abuses in Taxes and Benefices, by Pope Clement XIV,
21 September 1769

[9]Pope Clement XIV To the Bishops of [10]Sardinia. Venerable Brethren,
Greetings and Apostolic Blessing.

It is altogether befitting for the ministers of the Church and the
dispensers of divine mysteries to be exempt from any suspicion, however
light, of avarice; then they can be free to exercise their sacred
ministry in such a way that they can justly glory that their hands have
acted free of any reward. In fact Christ ordered this when He sent His
disciples to preach the gospel with the words, "Freely give what you
have freely received" (Mt 18:8). Paul also stated (1 Tm 3:8; Ti 1:7)
that this should be required of those chosen for the ministry of the
altar. This, finally, Peter inculcated in those in charge of the care
of souls, saying, "Be shepherds of the flock of God entrusted to you,
watching over it not for sordid gain, but freely" (1 Peter 5:2).
Pastors of the Church, who ought to be an example to the faithful, must
diligently observe this divine command and thus show themselves
irreprehensible; they must also be vigilant so as not to permit the
lower ministers over whom they have charge to perpetrate anything to
the contrary. They should always remember that noble sentiment of
Ambrose (Commentary on Luke 4:52), "Nevertheless, it is not sufficient
if you yourselves do not seek profit: the hands of your household must
also be restrained. Therefore instruct your household, exhort and watch
over it: and if your servant deceive you, let him be repudiated, if
apprehended, as scripture instructs."

Accordingly, both the holy councils and previous Roman Pontiffs have
repeatedly advocated that every possible avenue be closed so that such
evil abuses never creep into the Church of God, or if, by chance, they
had already done so, they be totally eradicated from its midst. It is
lamentable that these sanctions have either lacked effect in some
dioceses or been insufficiently strong or valid enough to root out
totally all contrary usages. And We know that this has come about
because those whose duty it was to carry them out most strictly have
put forward various excuses, such as ancient and inveterate custom or
the need of bestowing some reward on the ministers of ecclesiastical
curias or the necessity of making up for the lack of the means of
support required for a proper and decent manner of living in keeping
with one's state.

Because he understood all this properly, [11]Innocent XI, desiring to
invalidate any excuses whatsoever, in 1678 ordered that everything
pertinent to the matter be collected from the sacred canons, the
Council of Trent, the interpretations given by the congregations of
this Council, and proposals from consultations with bishops.
Furthermore he ordered that an explicit determination and mention by
name be made of all ecclesiastical affairs for which the reception of
any payment on the part of ecclesiastical courts and episcopal curias
was forbidden. The sole exception concerned what ought to go to the
Chancellor alone as a proper remuneration or as a necessary payment.
The same document also provided that in these matters the same
procedure and uniform discipline be observed in all ecclesiastical
curias; any custom to the contrary should be completely repudiated.
Innocent XI approved and confirmed this on October first of the same
year and ordered its promulgation and observance. Nevertheless, not
even this was enough to restore the universal collapse of
ecclesiastical discipline or to curb depraved customs rooted in various
dioceses. One objection was that the aforesaid did not impose a law to
be observed in ecclesiastical curias outside of Italy as well.
Nonetheless the decrees contained in it were taken from sacred canons
and principally from the Council of Trent, which all ecclesiastical
curias must obey.

2. Accordingly, with sorrow We have learned that many abuses in the
exercise of spiritual power (which not only totally destroy
ecclesiastical discipline, but also enfeeble and bring the greatest
shame upon your dignity and power) still exist in your ecclesiastical
curias. To be sure your piety, your holy mode of life, your solicitude
for your churches is more than sufficiently known to Us. We also know
that these abuses have been introduced in the past, first from some
secondary ministry or other, and have been gradually spread from
diocese to diocese, perhaps without the knowledge of bishops. In
certain places the greater dignity of a particular church has even led
to the increase of such abuses. Some ministers, whose successors in
office or ministry paid little attention and incautiously followed the
footsteps of their own predecessors, deemed these long standing and
customary abuses worthy of being proposed for approval by synodal
constitutions. Accordingly, you can in no way be blamed; rather you are
worthy of commendation because, as We have learned, you are grieved by
these abuses and wish to extirpate them.

We, however, perceiving how much you will be detested for this and how
great the obstacles will be unless the Apostolic Authority assists you
in this enterprise, accordingly make this intervention. We do this
especially because of the diversity of the fees and the varying
practices in different dioceses. As a result of Our intervention, We
anticipate conformity among all dioceses. Wherefore We are confident
that you will faithfully carry out Our decrees which were requested by
Charles Emmanuel, the illustrious king of [12]Sardinia. We are also
confident that you will see to it that they are diligently observed by
all to whom they pertain.

3. First, as far as concerns holy orders, you can hardly be ignorant of
the practically innumerable laws of the Church which forbid bishops and
others ordaining or any officials to receive anything from conferring
orders. This was most clearly forbidden by the Ecumenical Council of
Chalcedon in 451 (canon 2), by the Roman Synod held under Saint Gregory
the great in 600 or 604 (canon 5) and elsewhere in his Epistles (bk. 4,
epistle 44, indictment 13), by the Second Ecumenical Council of Nicaea
in 787 (canon 5), by that of Pavia in 1022 (canon 3), by the Fourth
Lateran Council under Innocent III in 1215, as well as by the councils
of Tours, Braga and [13]Barcelona, among others (collected by Christian
Wolf in dissert. 2 proem. de simonia, chap. 9, tome 4 and by
Gonzales-in chapter Antequam I de simonia, no. 9), and, most recently,
by the Council of Trent (session 21, chap. 1 on reform) which emended
the ancient canons allowing a spontaneous offering to be accepted and
restored ecclesiastical discipline concerning ordination to its
pristine and ancient purity.

The decree of the Council is as follows: "Since all suspicion of
avarice must be absent from ecclesiastical ordinations, the bishops or
other conferrers of orders or their ministers may not accept anything
for the conferring of any order whatsoever, even ecclesiastical
tonsure, or for dimissorial letters and testimonials, or for the seal
or anything else, even if spontaneously offered, under any pretext
whatever. Where the commendable custom of not accepting anything is not
prevalent, notaries may receive one tenth of an aureus for dimissorial
or testimonial letters, but only when no salary is provided for their
office. The bishop, however, may not receive, directly or indirectly,
any remuneration from that given to the notary for these letters.
Ordaining bishops and their ministers are to offer their services
freely. All contrary decrees and customs, which are rightly called
abuses and simoniacal corruptions, are rendered null and void. Those
acting to the contrary, both those giving and those receiving shall
ipso facto incur, in addition to divine retribution, the punishments
inflicted by law."

4. Therefore We instruct and order you not to accept anything, even
when offered spontaneously, for the bestowing of any orders whatsoever,
even for clerical tonsure, for dimissorial or testimonial letters, for
the seal, or for any other reason. The single exception is the offering
of a wax candle, which is the custom of the Roman pontifical. The
quality of the candle and its weight must be left completely up to the
judgment and free will of those who are being ordained. Likewise your
vicar generals will observe the same sanction as well as vicars forane,
chancellors, other ministers, associates, and members of your retinue
whom the Council of Trent forbids to receive or demand under any title
any emolument, reward, or gift on the occasion of sacred ordinations.

5. However, in those dioceses where no stipend or salary is provided
for the chancellor or notary of the ecclesiastical curia for the
carrying out of their office, We grant them permission, in the case of
an order already conferred, to be able to exact for each dimissorial
letter the tenth part only of a single aureus or ten obols of Roman
coinage. They may receive the same in cases of clerical tonsure, its
dimissorial letters, and ordinations to be received from a bishop who
comes from outside the diocese. They may not receive remuneration from
an order priest bound by vows of strict poverty and not having the use
of money. When the above-mentioned testimonial or dimissorial letters
refer to several orders already conferred or to be conferred by an
outside bishop, the same scale of remuneration must be observed: it is
by no means permitted to increase or multiply the stipend of ten obols
in proportion to the number of individual orders contained in the same
letters. By this, however, it is not Our mind to oblige the chancellor
or notary to be required to describe simultaneously different orders
conferred at different times and at different ordinations in the same
testimonial letters; this We order to take place only when it is a
question of those orders, viz. minor orders, which were conferred atone
and the same ordination. As for dimissorial letters which are given for
several orders to be received from an outside bishop, We forbid that
their texts be multiplied or anything else be demanded for requesting
the conferral of the orders or for access to the place of ordination or
under any other title of gift or reward.

6. Moreover, regarding the order of the subdiaconate, there may be
greater labor on the part of the chancellor or the notaries to
establish the veracity and propriety of the titles of patrimony or
benefice under which each one wishes to be promoted. For this labor as
well as for the other acts which must precede the conferring of the
said order, We grant them the right to receive some remuneration
congruent with their labor. This is to be estimated by the bishop
according to his judgment and conscience, which is to be weighty,
provided that the stipend for the inscription, seal and all other
things does not exceed one aureus or sixteen and a half julios. Those
who are to be promoted to orders, or their parents, to be free to use
any notary legitimately approved for the composing of such decrees
without being compelled to appear before the aforesaid curias together
with the necessary witnesses for the establishment and stipulation of
the patrimony and for the other required acts. The notary of the
curiato whom the decree is given, may accept remuneration from the
bishop as described above or the sum of one aureus or sixteen and
one-half julios, either for registering it or for any other labor.
However, he under no pretext can ask for or receive anything for the
publication of the decree or for letters of publication. This is
explicitly stated in the decree of the Council of Trent cited above; it
is clearly affirmed by the Sacred Congregation of the Council in the
case of the diocese of Vicenza, 7 February 1602 and by the sacred Synod
of bishops in the case of the diocese of Gerona, 25 October 1588 (to be
found in Fagnani in his chapter on ordination and simony, number
32ff.).

7. There are always two conditions to be observed when notaries and the
chancellor receive remuneration: first, they must not be receiving a
stipend or salary for exercising their office; secondly, no part of the
remuneration may go to the bishop, to any other conferrer of orders, or
to any official or minister, as has been declared by the same Council
of Trent.

8. In some curias there is the custom whereby the bishop or the vicar
general demands money before permission is granted for recently
ordained priests to celebrate their first Mass. Money is also requested
from priests, coming from another diocese with commendatory letters
from their respective bishops, before they are allowed to carry out
divine services. We can hardly conceive of such base practices as being
free from the suspicion of shameful profit and avarice. This custom,
although introduced and preserved under the title of a stipend or
remuneration given to the one who examines the priests regarding their
knowledge of sacred rites and ceremonies, must, nevertheless, be
totally eliminated. It is alien to the sacred canons and has been
frequently repudiated.

9. What We have said up to this point concerning holy ordinations can
be equally applied to the conferral or provision of ecclesiastical
benefices. This is evident if you read the canons of the Church which
have been drawn up to eradicate completely abuses springing up in this
matter at various times (cf. chapter si quis q. 3, chapter non satis 8,
chapter cum in ecclesia 9, chapter Jacobus 44 de simonia and elsewhere
in Christian Wolf in his cited dissertation de simonia chapter 10). And
although nothing was specifically decreed by the Council of Trent,
nevertheless the Sacred Congregation of the Council, with the approval
of the Supreme Pontiff Gregory XIII, declared that the decree (chapter
1, session 21 de ref.) had force also in the conferring of benefices,
especially those having the care of souls. It also declared that
nothing could be accepted for the seal, notwithstanding any time
honored custom to the contrary (Garz. de benef. part. 8 chapter 1,
numbers 76ff., Fagnan. chapter In ordinando de simonia, number 31,
Gallemart. in chapter 1, session 21 de reform.). Hence this same Sacred
Congregation, with the approval of the Supreme Pontiff, declared in a
letter to the bishop of Molfetta, that bestowers of benefices, no
matter what dignity they might possess, could neither accept nor demand
anything for conferring or disposing of benefices. They are not allowed
to accept or demand, whether directly or indirectly or under any title
including that of annate, any portion of the fruits of such benefices,
even from those offering or giving spontaneously. The notaries of those
granting benefices and any other officials who receive a fixed salary
from other sources should exactly observe the same norms. Those giving
and receiving benefices who fail to follow these norms are considered
bound by the penalties against simony given in the sacred canons and as
having incurred these penalties ipso facto; notaries and other
officials are suspended from their offices (Garz. loc. cit.).

10. We have called these matters to your attention, venerable brothers,
so that you might know how greatly abhorrent to ecclesiastical
discipline are the customs which exist here and there in your dioceses
concerning the conferral of benefices and with what care you must
strive to remove them totally. When you confer ecclesiastical
benefices-those involving the care of souls, those which are
residential, those which have no obligations, and those which are
called revocable chaplaincies, establish and observe the rule that you
neither demand nor receive anything under any pretext or title, even
that of a gift, reward or voluntary offering, especially when approving
or selecting the most worthy candidates for parochial churches or the
possession of benefices. The same canonical sanctions apply to any
other bestowers, vicars general, chancellors, relatives, friends and
members of your households, all of whom are forbidden to receive
anything.

11. From this general regulation are exempted only chancellors or
notaries who, as We have indicated elsewhere in this letter, receive no
stipend or salary for the exercise of their office. In this case the
chancellor, if it is a question of benefices involving the care of
souls, can exact ten obols for the edict or letter which publicly
announces the availability of the benefice, five obols for each copy
thereof, and five obols for posting them. If the announcement must be
posted outside the city, he may receive a daily remuneration,
determined by each diocese, for the expenses of the journey and its
necessary arrangements. When a chancellor sends a letter bestowing a
benefice which either involves the care of souls or entails no
obligations, he may receive a suitable recompense for his labor
according to the judgment of the bishop. This, however, may not exceed
one aureus or ten julios of Roman coinage for the writing, the seal and
other details, as has been frequently declared by the Sacred
Congregation of the Council, especially on 15 January 1594 (Gallemart.
loc. cit.) and in a letter to the bishop of Vicenze, 8 March 1602
(Fagnan. loc. cit. n. 32) and by the Sacred Congregation of Bishops of
25 October 1588 (Fagnan. ibid. n. 25). And, finally, for inscribing the
requisite documents for taking possession of these benefices, he may
receive three julios if they are within the city, four julios if in the
suburbs, and what each diocese determines for his daily expenses if
they are elsewhere. If the benefice is located in a place where there
is a chancellor or notary of the vicar forane, the person receiving the
benefice may, without any constraint, choose to summon the chancellor
of the episcopal curia for the act of taking possession. A notary may
as a recompense accept only two julios from persons who, having been
examined as applicants for a benefice, receive testimonial letters of
approval and use them as proof of their suitability.

12. We are well aware that the chancellor or notary labors greatly in
the selection of candidates for parish churches: he accepts testimony
as to the qualities, merits, and good works of the applicants on behalf
of the Church; he places in the record of the selection process the
requirements to be exhibited by the applicants; he summarizes these
requirements and makes several copies of the same for the bishop or the
vicar general taking his place; he delivers to the individual examiners
the material acquired so that they may make a judgment regarding the
knowledge of the applicants, their way of life, and the other gifts
necessary for them to administer a church. Moreover he draws up the
moral questions proposed by the same examiners, counts their votes,
proposes the act of selection, watches over the applicants for two and
at times three days, and presides in person over the examination of the
above-mentioned moral questions, etc. That some account should be taken
of this labor We grant by way of indulgence, leaving it to the judgment
and conscience of the bishop to determine a remuneration appropriate
only to the labor involved.

13. There are certain benefices reserved to and conferred by the Holy
See. There are also benefices involving the care of souls for which
testimonial letters of approval are given to the Apostolic Dataria as
well as notice of the selection of the candidates held according to the
form of the Council of Trent. Finally there are those benefices without
the care of souls, especially residential benefices, for which
testimonial letters concerning the manner of life, morals and
suitability of the applicants are likewise customarily offered to the
same Apostolic Dataria. In all these cases let chancellors beware not
to ask for any remuneration, reward or anything else, even if
spontaneously offered, for these letters except two julios for the
actual writing, the paper and the seal on the letter of suitability.
They may also accept two julios for testimonial letters about the
manner of life and moral qualities of the applicants.

14. For the execution of the apostolic letters, when these are to be
sent in the form which is called gratiosa, let neither the bishops nor
other officials presume to claim for themselves the office of
executors. It depends on the judgment and choice of those who have been
given the benefices to elect an executor or notary for the act of
taking possession of the benefice. There are two instances, however,
when the chancellor might receive remuneration: when the chancellor is
selected as the official for a person provided with a benefice; and
when the apostolic letters, sent in the forum called dignum, are
directed to the ordinary, his officialis or vicar, and are to be
carried out by them. In both cases, if there is no one who legitimately
contests the appointment so that there is only an executor, the
chancellor may receive remuneration for copying the same apostolic
letters, placing them in the record, and for carrying out properly the
other customary duties. This payment, not to exceed a gold scutum or
sixteen and a half julios, is to be determined in proportion to the
task by the judgment and conscience of the bishop. The bishop or any
other prelate, his vicar, officials, friends, and household members,
however, are absolutely forbidden to receive any remuneration, gift, or
other offering. However, if someone contests the appointment so that a
judicial process must be inaugurated, it is left to the serious
judgment and conscience of the bishop to determine a recompense that
conforms to the work undertaken by the notary or chancellor. In no case
is any part of this payment to be given, either directly or indirectly,
to the bishop or others mentioned above. Moreover, for the act of
taking possession of the benefice, let the same provisions mentioned
above be observed.

15. As for benefices which are given by way of patronage, if the fiscal
promoter or the one receiving the benefice contests that it is not
given by way of patronage but is freely conferred, everything is to be
observed as determined above concerning benefices freely given when
someone contests the appointment. Thus the chancellor may receive two
julios for the edict against the contestor or contestors, ten obols for
each copy of the edict, and one aureus or sixteen and a half julios for
the letter of institution. For posting the same edict he may receive
what was decreed in the case of benefices involving the care of souls.
Should a dispute arise among the co-patrons or their representatives
concerning not the right of patronage but its applicability, then let
the case be considered as profane, and the emoluments may be exacted
which correspond to the customary rates of each curia.

16. Likewise, We generally prohibit bishops, other prelates, their
vicars and officiales from presuming to exact anything in the following
cases: from removable chaplaincies; from establishing or erecting
chaplaincy benefices, sodalities, and congregations; from establishing,
blessing, consecrating, visiting, and approving churches or oratories
in accord with apostolic or ordinary authority. The chancellor alone
may receive a recompense befitting his labor as decided by the bishop,
provided that it does not exceed sixteen and a half julios.

17. As for matrimony or espousals, We propose that you observe what the
sacred canons (chapter cum in ecclesia 9, chapter suam nobis 29, de
simonia), Saint Gregory the Great (epistle to Januarius the bishop of
Cagliari (book 4, indict. 12, epistle 27) and others to be found in the
praiseworthy work of Christian Wolf (in dissertat. chapter 7) and most
recently the Council of Trent (session 22, chapter 5, de reformat.
Matrimon.) have decreed. Bishops, their vicars, and officials, members
of their households, and ministers should freely offer their services
in these matters. They shall not presume to exact any reward or
compensation, even if freely offered, for any of the following: decrees
concerning marriage dispensations received from the Holy See; their
labor in examining witnesses for such dispensations; the reception of
other testimony; the writing of testimonial letters as to a person's
canonical or other freedom to marry; dispensing from the banns,
required by the Council of Trent, to be announced during Mass on three
consecutive feast days by the pastors of those to contract a marriage,
granting permission to marry at home or elsewhere; allowing marriages
to take place during inappropriate or forbidden times or before a
priest other than the pastor. The same is true for any other act which
must be performed. All this has been declared by the Sacred
Congregation of the Council with the approval of the Supreme Pontiff,
any contrary custom however ancient notwithstanding (Garz. de benefic.
part. 8, chapter 1, number 102 and ff. and Fagnan, chapter quoniam, ne
praelati vices suas, number 30).

18. The same is especially true where bishops are accustomed to grant
pastors permission to proclaim banns of marriage in the church on three
successive feast days or to be present at the celebration of the
marriages when these pastors know there is no impediment. Such
permission should be obtained gratis. Care should also be taken that
any indiscriminate requirement that this permission be obtained before
the celebration of marriage not render the contract of marriage more
difficult and afford an occasion for great hardships. The Sacred
Congregation of Bishops in its reply to the bishop of Gerona on 25
October 1585 took care to remedy both these evils (cf. Fagnan chapter
In ordinando de simonia, n. 41). The canons and chapter of Gerona had
inquired regarding a decree of the bishop wherein he forbade pastors to
join spouses in marriage, even though the solemnities required by the
Council of Trent had been fulfilled, unless these pastors had
permission in writing, which was not to be given without the payment of
one half julio. The same Congregation replied as follows: "If for some
reasonable cause pastors are required, even when the solemnities of the
same Council have been fulfilled, to have previous permission from the
bishop before joining spouses in matrimony, this results from no law
prescribed for the bishop. It is left to his conscience and authority,
provided that the substance decreed by the same Council is observed
regarding the solemnities. Likewise, although it is sometimes proper to
require this of pastors in certain villages or cities, it should only
be done for some urgent reason. For just as bishops should see to it
that marriages take place with all the prescribed solemnities, so also
they should take care that the contract of marriage not be rendered
more difficult by adding new requirements without grave cause. If,
however, permission is required, nothing whatsoever can be exacted for
it even by the notary. If by chance ancient custom prescribes that
something be offered gratis to the bishop as a sign of happiness, this
does not seem entirely reprehensible."

19. Where the chancellor receives no set salary for exercising his
office, he may receive as recompense for his labor and as a necessary
stipend for his support some remuneration for the execution of
apostolic letters for matrimonial dispensations. When the chancellor
himself examines witnesses to establish the truth of what is contained
in the petition, he may receive something proportionate to the number
of witnesses and the gravity of his labor, but this should not exceed
five julios. If, however, the testimony of the witnesses is examined by
another, the chancellor may receive only two julios for the letter of
delegation; he may receive absolutely nothing for the decree, seal or
anything else. The chancellor may also receive two julios for
testimonial letters regarding freedom to marry: this would recompense
him for their writing, the paper and seal and everything else. He may
also receive ten obols for each of the witnesses he examines regarding
a person's freedom to marry and the lack of any canonical impediment.
Ten obols may be given when he acknowledges testimonial letters of
freedom to marry on behalf of those residing elsewhere, unless there is
need to examine another witness to remove all possible doubt. The
chancellor may also receive ten obols for any necessary examination in
the disposition of witnesses.

20. To exact money or anything else in the dispensation of the
sacraments has always seemed equally detestable. It is a practice
proceeding from avarice and greed. Therefore the sacred canons have
frequently denounced it as infected with simony and have taken care to
repress it with proper punishments and ecclesiastical censures, as is
clear from chapter 9 cum in ecclesiae corpore, chapter 42 ad
apostolicam, de simonia and from several decrees of councils (cf.
Christian Wolf loc. cit. chapters 7 and 8). Adhering faithfully to
these principles the Sacred Congregation of the Council has at no time
allowed the exacting of anything in the administration of the
sacraments. For instance, when a doubt was proposed whether the pastor
could receive the dish used for the administration of extreme unction,
the same Congregation, in a letter to the bishop of Alba, 20 February
1723, replied: "Its reception is not to be permitted" (Thes. resolut.
tome 2, page 280). Likewise, when the bishop of Vaison during the synod
held in 1729 drew up an assessment to be observed in his diocese in
which, among other things, the following directions concerning
[14]baptism were instituted: "The godfather or godmother shall supply
at least one candle and a white cloth for the baptismal ceremony,
unless they prefer to give five bronze coins for these and the
recording of the act in the public baptismal record," the question was
proposed: "Should the tax prescribed in the said synod be observed?"
The congregation replied in a letter to the bishop of Vaison on 6
February 1734: "Emphatically no" (Thes. resol. tome 6, page 209).

21. Among other things which are more frequently and bitterly denounced
by the sacred canons and councils is the custom which once prevailed
here and there of demanding money for the reception of chrism and holy
oil. Bishops have vainly tried to excuse this practice under various
names, e.g., a cathedraticum, an Easter offering, or an episcopal
custom (chapter 8 non satis, chapter 16 ea quae, chapter 36 in tantum,
de simonia and elsewhere in Christian Wolf, loc. cit., chapter 7
secundum sacramentum). Accordingly, when the Patriarch of the Maronites
at Antioch had been accustomed to receive a monetary offering during
the distribution of the holy oils, although it was clear that the money
was not given or received as payment for the oil but as an [15]alms for
the patriarch and as a support for the tasks incumbent on the
patriarchal office and dignity, nevertheless to remove any suspicion of
simony the aforesaid custom was rejected by the particular congregation
to which the affairs of the Maronites belong, and Benedict XIV
confirmed its decree (constit. apostolica 43, Bullar. tome 1).

22. We think that this is more than enough, venerable brethren, for you
to understand your duty in the administration of the sacraments, for
carrying it out perfectly, and for totally eradicating the improper
practices prevailing in some dioceses whereby money is demanded by the
bishop or the prefect of the sacristy in the distribution of holy oils.
This practice has been frequently reprobated by the Sacred Congregation
of the Council especially in a reply to the diocese of Amalfi, 18 July
1699, confirmed on 6 February 1100, to doubt 12, "Is the [16]archbishop
required to demand that the holy oils be given gratis to the pastors of
churches?" to which the Congregation replied "affirmatively." And the
Sacred Congregation of Bishops held in Acerenza, 18 March 1706,
prescribed the same (Petras Comment. ad constitut. 5 Innocentii IV
number 38).

23. As to the offering of a candle to the bishop administering
confirmation, which We have heard takes place in some of your dioceses,
it is evident that the pontifical ritual books do not mention this
practice. Moreover, the sacred function of ministry compels all
ministers to observe moderation in the reception of offerings and in
their way of proceeding so that their ministry not be censured by
giving the impression of avarice or greed for money with the result
that the reverence due to so great a sacrament becomes thereby
cheapened. Consequently great care must be taken lest there arise a
suspicion that the candle is not freely offered but demanded. In the
latter case the faithful, especially the poor, would refrain from
receiving the sacrament or delay its reception longer than is proper.
Therefore it is most desirable that this custom be totally removed or,
at least, that it be observed in such a way that it depend completely
on the free will of those making the offering.

24. The same laws, moreover, prescribe that bishops, their chancellors,
and notaries ought to exercise their ministry gratis when, after
previous examination and approbation, faculties are given to anyone for
hearing sacramental confessions, for administering the sacraments, and
for exercising ecclesiastical ministries. The same is true when they
appoint suitable vicars whether permanent or removable, economic
officials, and coadjutors. This is stated in cap. ad nostrum de simonia
and is declared by the frequently cited reply to the diocese of Vicenza
of 7 February and 8 March 1602 and by the reply to the diocese of
Gerona, 25 October 1588, question 7, which repudiate any pretext
otherwise, even that of recompense for drawing up letters permitting
the exercise of these ministerial offices.

25. We judge that none of you can be ignorant of how it has been
frequently and severely forbidden to demand money for funeral and
burial services (cf. Christian Wolf, loc. cit. chapter 12 and
Van-Espen. in jus eccles. unis. chapter 4, paragraph 2, title 38). Let
it suffice to indicate what Saint Gregory the Great wrote in his letter
to Januarius, the bishop of Cagliari (book 9, indict. 2, epistle 3 and
also book 7, indict. 2, epistle 56): "A most famous woman, Nereida, has
complained to Us that your fraternity has not blushed to ask of her a
hundred solidis for the burial of her daughter . . . If this is true,
it is a very serious matter; it is far from the office of a priest to
ask a price for ground allotted for decomposition and to desire profit
from another's grief. We have forbidden this improper custom in Our
church and We have never allowed this evil custom to take over . . .
Wherefore, I reprove this vice of avarice; may no one presume to
practice it elsewhere." Nevertheless, these laws have never condemned
the laudable and pious custom, observed from the earliest days of the
Church, of making an offering for the dead at funerals; nor have the
clergy ever been forbidden to receive them. Accordingly, Gregory (loc.
cit.) immediately adds: "If, indeed, parents, relatives or heirs of
such a one wish to spontaneously offer something for the lighting of
candles, We do not forbid it being accepted. But to demand or ask for
something We totally prohibit." Likewise, Innocent III made the same
decision at the Lateran Council (chapter ad Apostolicam 42 de simonia).

26. To be sure, in the absence of personal tithes and with a decline in
bequests of property or mixed goods to monasteries and chapters of
canons, it was sometimes necessary to compel, as it were, the laity to
offer pious oblations, which are now customary, so as to provide for
the necessities of pastors and parish churches. Nevertheless, the
sanctity of ecclesiastical discipline has always been considered, and
caution has been taken lest there be aberrations with regard to these
laudable customs on the part of clerics through excess or the laity by
defect. Therefore, among other things, it was forbidden that funeral
services and burials of citizens or foreigners be impeded or delayed
for the sake of demanding emoluments introduced by pious custom. It was
also forbidden that anything be demanded for permission to transfer the
corpse or to bury it in one place rather than another.

27. Except for the traditional offering bestowed with a view to pious
offices offered for the benefit of soul and body, nothing else is to be
tolerated in your dioceses. The pastor may not receive anything,
whether occasionally or habitually, with respect of the circumstances
and various dignity of persons or in consideration of the prestige of
the place of burial, whether in the church or in a more imposing place
belonging to the church. It is also abhorent to the sacred canons that
the bishop demand or receive any money for burying either an adult or a
child in any diocesan church, even that of religious communities, as
the Sacred Congregation of the Council declared against the bishop of
Vicenza and as the holy synod of bishops maintained against the bishop
of Gerona (Fagnan. in the chapter In ordinando, de simonia 10, numbers
32 ff.), notwithstanding any custom, however ancient, or any pretext,
title, or claim to the contrary.

28. In the visitation of your dioceses do not even allow yourselves to
be suspected of avarice or base gain. It should be obvious that you
seek not your own good but that of Jesus Christ's when you carefully
observe what the fathers of the Council of Trent enjoin in this regard:
"Let (visitors) not be troublesome by useless or burdensome expenses.
Neither they nor any of their staff are to accept any money or gift
under any title even from bequests for pious purposes unless this is
due by law, despite any custom to the contrary, no matter how long
standing. They may receive only a frugal or modest sustenance for only
necessities during the time of visitation. However, those being visited
may decide whether to give what they were formerly accustomed to pay,
that is a certain sum of money, or to provide the aforesaid sustenance"
(session 24, chapter 3, de ref.).

29. The Sacred Congregation of the Council has issued various
declarations and edicts on this decree. Some may be mentioned here.
First, it has often been disputed whether the bishop can exact what are
called "provisions" for visiting the [17]cathedral or the clergy
residing within the city or any other place where he usually resides.
Some have observed that the statutes enacted by the Council of Trent
applied only to the visitation of the diocese without any mention of
the city. And sustenance, some argued, was to be given "for only
necessities during the time of visitation," and such necessity surely
does not seem to be present when the bishop visits places in which he
is bound to reside or is accustomed to live at least some part of the
year. The Sacred Congregation, however, decided that any traditional
canons or customs to the contrary were abolished by the aforementioned
decree of the Council of Trent. The same Congregation constantly
replied negatively in the case of Castro on 17 November 1685, in the
case of Amalfi on 18 July 1705, in the case of Policastro on 1 June
1737 and, most recently, in the case of Torre San Gennaro on 30 January
1768. The same was the opinion of the sacred synod of bishops, as is
clear from the letter sent to the Patriarch of Venice on 26 May 1592.

30. The aforementioned decree of the Council of Trent, also agreeing
with what is found in the chapter Si episcopus de off. Ordinarii, 6,
expressly states that neither bishops nor any of their staff are to
accept any money or gift under any title. They may receive only
sustenance or, if those being visited prefer, money corresponding to
this sustenance. And yet there were some who argued that they could
receive sustenance in addition to money, or along with sustenance
transportation by horse for themselves and their ministers, or
something else under some title or pretext of a civic nature. These,
however, have always lost their case in the Sacred Congregation of the
Council which has constantly disapproved their manner of action as
alien to the Council of Trent. In the case of the visitation of Saint
Mark the following two questions, among others, were asked: V. "Must
the clergy pay anything to the ministers and other officials for the
visitation of the bishop?" VI. "Must the same clergy pay for
transportation by horse for a visiting bishop?" On 7 July 1708, the
following prescript was sent: "Earlier decrees must be followed: as to
Proposition V that issued to the bishop of Amalfi, 18 July 1699 (to
Proposition III, Decret., book 49, page 252); as to Proposition VI that
issued to the bishop of Abruzzo, December 1784 (Decret., book 4, page
10)." Consequently the response of the Congregation, according to the
decrees it indicated, was: "To Proposition V, sustenance is owed only
as determined by the Council; to Proposition VI, negative." In another
case concerning Saint Mark, the Congregation on 16 January 1723 replied
to various questions. Question III: "Should the accustomed sum of
money, reckoned according to the practice of the place to be visited,
be paid for supplying provisions, and for providing three meals to the
bishop and his retinue, and for providing transportation, habitation
and other necessities?" Question IV: "Are food and other necessities to
be provided for the bishop and his retinue throughout the whole
visitation?" Replying to Question III, the Congregation stated: "It is
the option of those being visited to provide either sustenance or
money, but if money is paid the three meals are excluded; and as for
transportation by horse, follow the decree of 7 July 1708 in the case
of Saint Mark, preposition VI. Regarding Question IV, the answer is
provided in III." Likewise, in the case of Policastro the same topic
came up in question II: "Can the bishop demand from the archpriest and
clerics XV ducats in money in addition to food and transportation on
horseback for himself and his retinue?" The Congregation's response on
1 June 1737 was "No."

31. It was also disputed whether the bishop and his officials could
demand for themselves some remuneration if in the course of the
visitation they examine wills and legacies on behalf of pious causes
and hand them over for execution. On this matter the Sacred
Congregation of the Council declared in the case of the bishop of
Mallorca, 7 August 1638, that the bishop and his officials may not
receive a salary for decrees or decisions of execution of pious
legacies in the course of the visitation, despite any longstanding
customs to the contrary. A similar question arose in 1645 between the
bishop of Vicenza and royal officials of the city of Manresa. This was
brought to the same Congregation which responded on 18 March 1645: "The
Congregation decided that bishops and their officials receive nothing
in their visitation for decrees or judgments concerning the execution
of wills or legacies, but that must all be done gratis, notwithstanding
any ancient custom. Likewise outside the visitation by the bishop and
his officials nothing can be received for such decrees and judgments,
but a moderate sum may be paid to the notary for his writing and
labor." The same response was given to Question VIII in the case of La
Muga on 28 March 1648. It is not out of place to add here what was
decreed by the fifth provincial council of Milan: "The notary or the
chancellor may not exact anything during the visitation from those
being visited nor accept any gift, however small or however offered.
The same holds true for proclaiming decrees and orders during the
visitation, for their writing and for making copies of them, whether
for individuals, churches, clerics, or others who are visited after the
decree of visitation has been published. He may, however, be
recompensed, according to the assessment that has or will be determined
by the episcopal curia, for the labor expended in making copies of such
decrees and orders when later requested by an interested third party.

32. The same is to be observed when inspecting records of pious
legacies and their satisfaction and when requisitioning accounts
pertaining to the administration of churches, confraternities, pious
monetary institutions and similar places. The bishop and all his
officials are to carry out these tasks freely. This is clear from what
has been said above and from the responses of the Sacred Congregation
of the Council. On 27 June 1637 the Council declared in the case of the
bishop of Vicenza: "Neither the bishop nor his officials can receive
anything for examining accounts of the administration of pious works or
for the execution of will or pious intentions but should carry out
these tasks gratis, notwithstanding any custom to the contrary." In the
case of the confraternity of Lanciano, the following question was
proposed: "Should the [18]archbishop for the revision of accounts
employ syndics or accountants chosen by the confraternity or can he
employ someone else who seems good to him?" On 20 September 1710 the
Congregation replied: "No to the first part, yes to the second, but
gratis" (Thes. res. tome 6, page 164). Although the bishop certainly
ought to take care that these types of records be reviewed gratis and
that an account be demanded by his own notary, the financial official
of his household, or someone else in his service, it can sometimes
happen that for a grave or urgent reason he ought to depute for the
task some outsider who is in no way connected with the matter. As often
as this happens, the bishop will conscientiously assign some
remuneration, proportionate to the labor alone, for the reduction, as
the Sacred Congregation stated in the case of the bishop of Veroli,
[19]30 January [20]1682 (decret. f., book 35, page 283), in the case of
Benevento, 7 June 1683, and in the case of [21]Pisa, [22]11 December
[23]1683.

33. Since the declarations of the Sacred Congregation are firmly based
on the sacred canons, it is difficult to reconcile with the decrees of
the Council of Trent the following rather corrupt customs of bishops
and their officials: receiving during the visitation a remuneration for
inspecting certain wills or for reviewing the accounts required from
administrators of churches and pious places; receiving transportation
on horseback or at least their provisions for the entire time of the
visitation; or claiming as their own lamps or candles placed on the
main and other altars of the church. Being contrary to the sacred
canons, these and similar practices are to be completely eliminated.

34. Although the 18 March 1645 decree of the Sacred Congregation of the
Council in the case of Vicenza states that the bishop and his officials
may never receive anything for decrees and judgments relative to the
execution of wills and legacies, he may, nevertheless, during the
visitation receive the portion due him from pious legacies and
offerings and other things which come to the church on the occasion of
a funeral. This is customarily called the fourth canonical part, and
its acceptance was allowed by the same Congregation in responding to
Question VIII in the case of the bishop of Urgel on 25 January 1676 and
14 February 1693. The bishop has this right from the sacred canons
(chapter 14 officii, et requisiti 5, de testamentis). That the Council
of Trent wished this right to remain in force is clear insofar as the
Council severely prohibits bishops from receiving anything for the
visitation even from testaments for pious uses "except that which is
owed to them from pious bequests by law" (session 24, chapter 3, de
ref.). In exacting this portion or canonical fourth, bishops must
observe the correct limits as determined by the same holy canons
(chapter finali de testamentis), which state: "The canonical
portion....ought not be deducted from what is bestowed to churches or
other pious places for building, decoration, candles, anniversaries on
the seventh, twentieth, or thirtieth days, or for perpetuating divine
worship. Practically the same is found in cap. ex parte de verb.
signif. Moreover nothing is deducted from a legacy providing a marriage
dowry for girls, as the Sacred Congregation of Bishops responded in the
case of Nocera, on 14 September 1592. Nor is anything taken from
legacies for the celebration of Masses. The Sacred Congregation of the
Council on 13 January 1714 in the case of Nocera declared this to be so
(quartae canonicae, decret., book 64) even though from time immemorial
the same fourth was granted to bishops from all legacies.

35. As for convents of nuns or houses of pious women who live apart
from the world in the manner of nuns, the apostolic constitutions and
the Congregations both of Bishops and of Religious have decreed, with
the approval of the Supreme Pontiffs, that bishops, prelates, vicar
generals, special delegates, officials, as well as relatives and
members of their households may not demand or receive remuneration of
any kind for the following: admitting girls to the religious life;
approving their dowries; examining their motive for entering an
institute of religious life; receiving their profession; allowing girls
to receive their education within a convent; assisting at their
renunciation of goods before they are admitted to profession; presiding
at the election of an abbess or other superior; granting permission for
doctors, surgeons and other professional men to enter the convent;
granting a person permission to address nuns or others living in the
cloister; delegating confessors, chaplains, financial officials,
administrators of temporal goods, and other ministers; and, in general,
for any act necessary for nuns to pursue their way of life.

36. An exception to this general rule is made for the sustenance
required by the bishop or prelate on the occasion of some of these
actions. And yet this may be provided only by way of recompense or
donation, and it is not to exceed an amount sufficient for three days.
The chancellor, however, may be recompensed for his labor in drawing up
the documents of renunciation and in depositing the dowry, but this
should never exceed ten julios.

37. In addition to the above, there are many more acts that should be
utterly free from any remuneration. These pertain either to the
exercise of spiritual power or to those episcopal functions for which
the bishop, although permitted to receive his sustenance, may neither
directly nor indirectly accept any remuneration under any pretext or
title, even that of a gift or a spontaneous offering. The same applies
to their vicars, officials, and household members. We shall
specifically enumerate at least the most important of these. Drawn from
the sacred canons, apostolic constitutions, and decrees of the sacred
congregations, they are frequently mentioned by eminent authorities and
are rather commonly known.

38. For granting letters patent, as they are called, or permission to
preach in Lent and [24]Advent and any other time and in any place
(Council of Trent, session 5, chapter 2, de reform.).

For granting permission to perform servile works on feast days for a
grave cause (Urban VIII in his constitution, Universa) several decrees
of the sacred congregations of the council and the bishops (Ferrar.
verba festa, numbers 31 ff.), although the money which is received from
using this permission is to be converted to pious uses.

For reviewing administrative accounts of churches and pious places, and
for the revision of these accounts whether done by the bishop, some
general delegate or a delegate specifically chosen by the bishop, with
the exception, however, indicated above.

For recognizing, approving, and promulgating relics, indulgences, and
privileged altars.

For granting permission to seek [25]alms or anything else, even if
granted to those from outside the diocese.

For appointing church custodians and sacristans.

For granting testimonial letters of poverty or another state of life.
The chancellor, however, may receive ten obols.

For granting testimonial letters which state that someone has not
entered any order or received clerical tonsure. The chancellor may be
offered ten obols only.

For the act of renunciation of the clerical state and its admission as
well as for letters of attestation as to its renunciation. For these
documents the chancellor can require ten obols.

For searching the episcopal archives to find parochial books listing
[26]baptisms, confirmations, weddings, and deaths. For each book the
chancellor can require only twenty obols. The same may be asked for a
letter attesting a particular record. It is, however, allowable to
accept a larger remuneration depending on the dignity of the person
requesting or whether the testimonial letters are to be used outside
the diocese or kingdom.

It might happen, however, that the parochial records are unclear
regarding the matter for which testimony is sought, and consequently it
is necessary to obtain proof from witnesses. In this case the
chancellor may not only receive the prescribed assessment for examining
witnesses and for recording their testimony, but also another fifteen
obols for writing the testimonial letters. The vicar general may
receive thirty obols for the decrees ordering information to be sought
and for ordering the letters testifying as to the information he
received and evaluated.

For granting permission to relinquish churches or benefices (Council of
Trent, session 23, chapter 1, de ref.). Likewise for commendatory
letters required by priests, clerics or others moving to other
dioceses.

For writing letters of warning of excommunication in cases where hidden
matters have been made public, whether these letters are issued by the
episcopal curia or by the ordinary of the place, or whether they come
from the Holy See. The chancellor may receive ten obols for his labor
in writing them. Likewise he alone will be given another sum, reckoned
according to the conscience of the bishop, for making copies of these
letters and for procuring the previous decree of the vicar.

For writing warnings, sentences, or declarations of censures received
for striking a cleric or any other cause; also for the sentence of
[27]absolution and for the [28]absolution itself from censures (chapter
ad aures de simonia). The chancellor may exact twenty obols as
recompense for their writing, provided that it is not a question of
carrying out letters of the Sacred Apostolic Penitentiary; in this case
the chancellor may not be recompensed. Twenty obols can also be paid to
the chancellor for the list of censures commonly called a schedule and
for the list of those censures which are customarily imposed. The same
is observed when absolving from an oath but in the following manner: if
the [29]absolution is granted in the ecclesiastic curia, the chancellor
may be paid twenty obols only for its attestation; when done outside
the curia, he may receive the same fee only for the letters of
delegation.

For granting permission to exercise pontifical rights.

For executing apostolic letters that impart blessings or
[30]absolutions, and for writing letters by which pastors or others are
granted the faculty contained in the same apostolic letters, the
chancellor may receive only thirty obols for both.

For executing apostolic letters or faculties granted by a congregation
pertaining to the purchase, sale, or exchange of churches and pious
places, or pertaining to a census, the chancellor may be remunerated
according to his labor, but this is not to exceed ten julios. If the
Holy See has requested the bishop to inquire into the truth of what is
contained in the libellus of supplication, then the chancellor may
receive ten obols for each witness examined. He may also receive
something for drawing up edicts, for examining witnesses as to the
usefulness of any sale, and for anything else in this matter. The sum,
granted in accord with his labor, is to be determined by the
conscientious judgment of the bishop.

For writing the decree of sale which by force of chapter 12, terrulas,
question 2, only takes place with the authority of the ordinary.

39. Fines or monetary punishments, when imposed in proportion to the
crime or the nature of the wrongdoer, must be expended only for pious
purposes and the exactment of justice so that nothing can in any way
accrue for the private gain of the bishop, his vicar, or any other
official. So that all doubt or suspicion of improper use be removed, it
may be well or even necessary that the sentences themselves designate
the pious uses or the churches benefitting from aforementioned
pecuniary punishments, although those most in need and the domicile of
the offenders should always be kept in mind.

40. We must now add other things pertaining to the forum of settling
disputes, so that ecclesiastical discipline in these matters too be
restored to its pristine splendor and dignity. Deliberations must be
characterized by a more mature judgment, and We are to be fully
informed of the customs existing in dioceses. There is one thing,
meanwhile, which We must impress upon you, namely, that ecclesiastics
who pass sentence in spiritual matters should fulfill their task with
such sanctity and piety that nothing obscures the candor of
ecclesiastical purity. Therefore your ecclesiastical judges shall not
demand or accept any remuneration, even for delivering sentences in
spiritual cases and in those especially which have to do with religion,
such as those against people suspected of heresy and found guilty of
superstition, or which concern espousal, matrimony, censures and other
such matters. In the words of Innocent III to the prelates and clerics
of Lombardy (chapter cum ab omni de vita et honestate clericorum),
"Realizing that there are revenues deputed for you and for other
clerics so that you might live properly, you should not reach out to
base gain or look for evil rewards. Your light should shine as an
example to the laity and, unlike seculars, you should not seize the
occasion of the law for evil commerce. Just as you abstain from these
exactions in other respects and are eager to grant the force of the law
to litigants, even when they are deceitful, so the same is demanded
from those passing judgments, since not even judges are allowed to sell
a just judgment and even secular laws reject sentences that can be
bought."

41. In keeping with Our apostolic office and its obligations, We
propose these things to you. If you rightly carry them out, they will
aid the splendor of ecclesiastical discipline, the tranquility of your
consciences, and the best guidance of your flocks. We do not think that
they will be burdensome and harmful to you, although they will somewhat
reduce your customary emoluments. Even the least suspicion about you is
absent in view of your exemplary piety, proven religious sentiments,
and your zeal for preserving ecclesiastical discipline whereby what
till now was gain for you will in the future be considered a loss for
Christ. You will place your true gain in this alone, that the worship
of God be ever increased, that the people committed to you be more
easily and felicitously fed by your word and example.

Moreover, those versed in the ecclesiastical affairs of your island and
especially those representing the king have informed Us that your
accustomed revenues, except for those few which you are now forbidden
to demand or receive, can provide for your episcopal dignity and will
suffice for the necessities of your churches. So that you do not think
that you have any support for these customs, even most ancient, upon
which you have relied till now, you must be mindful of what Alexander
III (chapter cum in ecclesis, de simonia) wrote as He upbraided those
who unduly clung to their customs, "Many think that they may have
permission since they believe that the law concerning the dead has
force by reason of its age. Blinded by cupidity, they are not
sufficiently aware that crimes are the more heinous the longer they
shackle the spirit." We declare and teach that these customs, even
though most ancient or supported by synodal constitutions and any other
authority, even apostolic, are to be considered as abuses and
corruptions. That you will in no way be wanting in zeal, diligence and
industry on behalf of Our concern for your churches, is Our certain and
most firm hope. Meanwhile, as a pledge of Our paternal love and
benevolence for you, We grant you the apostolic blessing.

Given in Rome, at Saint Mary Major, [31]21 September [32]1769, in the
first year of Our Pontificate.

