____________________

[8]Ecclesiae Sanctae, by Pope Paul VI, 6 August 1966

APOSTOLIC LETTER `ECCLESIAE SANCTAE', ISSUED MOTU PROPRIO, IMPLEMENTING
THE FOLLOWING DECREES OF VATICAN COUNCIL II:

[9]official portrait of Pope Paul VI CHRISTUS DOMINUS
Decree on the Pastoral Office of Bishops in the Church

PRESBYTERORUM ORDINIS
Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests

PERFECTAE CARITATIS
Decree on the Adaptation and Renewal of Religious Life

AD GENTES DIVINITUS
Decree on the Missionary Activity of the Church

The governing of holy Church, following the conclusion of the Second
Ecumenical Vatican Council, demands indeed that new norms be
established and that new adjustments be made to meet relationships
introduced by the Council and which will be more and more adapted to
the new goals and areas of the apostolate which through the Council
have been opened up to the Church in the modern world. Because of great
changes this world is in need of a shining light and longs for the
supernatural flame of charity.

Prompted therefore by these considerations, as soon as the Ecumenical
Council ended we appointed study commissions to apply their learning
and experience to determine to the best of their ability definite norms
for the implementation of the decrees of the Council for which a
suspension of the effects of the law (vacatio legis) had been decreed.
As we gladly wrote in the letter issued motu proprio last June 10
beginning with the words Munus Apostolicum those commissions devoted
themselves diligently to their assigned task, and at the appointed time
informed us of their conclusions.

After careful consideration of these conclusions we consider that now
is the time to publish these norms. However since this involves matters
pertaining to discipline, an area in which experience can still offer
more suggestions, and since on the other hand a special commission is
engaged in revising and improving the Code of Canon Law in which all
the laws of the Church will be arranged in a more consistent, and
suitable, and at the same time definitive manner, we think that we will
be acting wisely and prudently if we publish these norms on an
experimental basis. During this interval it will be the right of
episcopal conferences to make known to us their observations and
comments which the implementation of the norms will perhaps suggest to
be made and to present new measures to us.

Therefore after carefully examining the matter, motu proprio and by our
apostolic authority we decree and promulgate the following norms for
the implementation of the decrees of the Council which begin with these
words: Christus Dominus (On the Bishops' Pastoral Office in the Church)
Presbyterorum Ordinis (On the Life and Ministry of Priests), Perfectae
Caritatis (On the Adaptation and Renewal of Religious Life) and Ad
Gentes Divinitus (On the Missionary Activity of the Church), and we
command that they be observed by way of experiment, that is until the
new Code of Canon Law is promulgated, unless in the meantime some other
provision is to be made by the Apostolic See.

These norms will begin to be in force next October 11, the feast of the
Maternity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, on which day the holy Council was
begun four years ago by our predecessor of venerable memory, John
XXIII.

We order that whatever has been prescribed by us in this letter issued
motu proprio be firm and ratified, all things to the contrary, even
those worthy of most special mention, not withstanding.

Given at Rome at St. Peter's, August 6, the feast of the
Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ, 1966, in the fourth year of
our pontificate.

POPE PAUL VI

***

I. NORMS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE DECREES OF THE SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL
CHRISTUS DOMINUS AND PRESBYTERORUM ORDINIS

The Episcopal Office, which the holy Second Vatican Council placed in a
clearer light in the Dogmatic Constitution Lumen Gentium and in the
Decree Christus Dominus, was divinely established for the building up
of the Mystical Body of Christ, which is the Church.

For this reason the sacred shepherds are bound to fulfill their office
of teaching, sanctifying, and feeding the People of God with enduring
care, both by generously sharing with the Roman Pontiff concern for all
the churches, and by providing more zealously for the correct ruling of
the dioceses entrusted to them, and lastly by working together
energetically for the common good of the various churches.

In the government of the dioceses entrusted to them, however, the
bishops have necessary helpers and counselors especially the
priestsÂ--whom they should be willing to hear, in fact consult,
preserving all the while the bishops' power to act freely, in setting
down methods of procedure and norms and in making laws in keeping with
the awareness of their obligation and the principles of Church
government (cfr. Dogmatic Constitution Lumen Gentium, No. 27).

That bishops then may be able more easily and aptly to exercise their
pastoral office and more effectively put into practice the principles
which have been solemnly approved by the holy Council either in the
Decree Christus Dominus or in the Decree Presbyterorum Ordinis, the
following norms are established.

DISTRIBUTION OF THE CLERGY
AND AID TO BE GIVEN TO DIOCESES
(No. 6 of The Decree Christus Dominus and no. 10 of Presbyterorum
Ordinis)

1. If it seems opportune, a special committee will be established at
the Apostolic See whose function it will be to propose general
principles by which a more suitable distribution of the clergy is to be
regulated, keeping in mind the needs of the various churches.

2. It will pertain to the patriarchal synods and the episcopal
conferences, with careful attention to the prescriptions of the
Apostolic See, to enact regulations and publish norms for the bishops
in order to obtain a suitable distribution of the clergy, both of their
own territory and of those coming from other regions, by which
provision is made for the needs of all the dioceses in their territory
and the welfare of the churches in mission countries and in nations
suffering from a lack of clergy. In each episcopal conference,
therefore, a commission should be established whose task will be to
investigate the needs of the various dioceses within their territory
and the possibilities of giving some of their own clergy to other
churches, to carry out the decisions made and approved by the
conferences regarding the distribution of the clergy and to inform the
bishops of the territory of these decisions.

3. To facilitate the transfer of clerics from one diocese to
anotherÂ--without prejudice to the system of incardination and
excardination, which is of course to be adjusted to new
circumstancesÂ--the following regulations should be observed.

(1) Clerics are to be so instructed in the seminaries as to be
concerned not only for the diocese for whose service they are ordained,
but also for the whole Church, and so that they may be ready to
dedicate themselves, with the permission of their own bishops, to those
particular churches whose needs are urgent;

(2) Aside from real necessity in their own diocese, Ordinaries or
hierarchs should not deny permission to emigrate to those clerics whom
they know to be prepared and consider suitable to go to regions
suffering from a grave shortage of clergy, to carry on the sacred
ministry there. They are to see to it, however, that by a written
agreement with the Ordinary of the place in question the rights and
obligations of their clerics are clearly determined;

(3) These same Ordinaries should see to it that clerics intending to
transfer from their own diocese to the diocese of another country are
suitably prepared for the exercise of the sacred ministry there; that
is, that they acquire a knowledge of the region's language and that
they understand the country's institutions, social conditions, customs
and practices;

(4) Ordinaries can grant their clerics permission to transfer to
another diocese for a specified time, even to be renewed repeatedly, in
such a way, however, that these clerics remain incardinated in their
own diocese and enjoy all the rights on their return which they would
have if they had been assigned to the sacred ministry in the diocese;
(5) However, a cleric who legitimately transfers from his own diocese
to another is, by law, incardinated into the new diocese at the end of
five years if he manifest such an intention in writing both to the
Ordinary of the guest diocese and to his own Ordinary and provided that
neither of these indicate his opposition to his intention in writing
within four months.

4. Moreover, to carry on special pastoral or missionary work for
various regions or social groups which are in need of special
assistance, prelatures composed of priests from the secular clergy
equipped with special training can be usefully established by the
Apostolic See. These prelatures are under the government of their own
prelate and possess their own statutes.

It will be in the competence of this prelate to establish and direct a
national or international seminary in which students are suitably
instructed. The same prelate has the right to incardinate the same
students and to promote them to sacred orders under the title of
service for the prelature.

The prelate must make provision for the spiritual life of those whom he
has ordained according to the above title, and for the continual
perfecting of their special training and their special ministry making
agreements with the local Ordinaries to whom the priests are sent. He
must likewise provide for their proper support, a matter which must be
provided for through the same agreements, matter from the resources
which belong to the prelature itself or from other suitable resources.
In like manner he must provide for those who on account of poor health
or for other causes must leave the task assisted to them.

Laymen, whether single or married, may also dedicate themselves with
their professional skill to the service of these works and projects
after making an agreement with the prelature.

Such prelatures are not erected unless the episcopal conferences of the
territory in which they will render their services have been consulted.
In rendering this service, diligent care is to be taken to safeguard
the rights of local Ordinaries and close contacts with the same
episcopal conferences are always to be maintained.

5. Finally it is also within the competence of patriarchal synods and
episcopal conferences to establish appropriate regulations with regard
to the use of ecclesiastical property, paying attention above all to
the needs of the dioceses themselves in the territory. In these
regulations certain subsidies may be imposed on dioceses to be given to
works of the apostolate or of charity or to churches provided with
meager resources or in poverty because of special circumstances.

THE POWER OF DIOCESAN BISHOPS
(No. 8 of The Decree Christus Dominus)

6. Norms for the implementation of the prescription of No. 8 have been
set down in the Apostolic Letter issued motu proprio June 15, 1966,
which begins with the words De Episcoporum Muneribus.

FOSTERING PASTORAL STUDY AND SCIENCE
(NO. 16 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS
AND NO. 19 OF THE DECREE PRESBYTERORUM ORDINIS)

7. Bishops either individually or collectively should make provisions
that all priests, even if engaged in the ministry, complete a series of
pastoral lectures in the course of the year immediately after
ordination and that they attend at specified times other lectures in
which an opportunity is given to their priests both to acquire a fuller
knowledge of pastoral methods and of the theological, moral and
liturgical sciences, and to strengthen their spiritual life and to
share their apostolic experiences with their brother priests.

Bishops or episcopal conferences should also see to it that, according
to local conditions, one or several priests of proven learning and
virtue are chosen as moderators of studies to promote and arrange
pastoral lectures and other aids which are considered necessary to
foster the scientific and pastoral training of priests of their own
territory: study centers, mobile libraries, congresses on catechetics,
homiletics or the liturgy and other subjects of this kind.

EQUITABLE REMUNERATION FOR PRIESTS
AND SOCIAL SECURITY FOR PRIESTS
(NO. 16 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS
AND NOS. 20-21 OF THE DECREE PRESBYTERORUM ORDINIS)

8. Patriarchal synods and episcopal conferences are to see to it that
norms are established, either for individual dioceses or for several of
them together, or for the whole territory by which suitable provision
is made for the sustenance of all clerics who exercise or have
exercised an office for the service of the people of God. The
remuneration to be given to clerics first of all should be the same for
all those who work under the same circumstances, taking into account
both the nature of the office and of times and places, and the
remuneration must be sufficient so that clerics can lead an honorable
life and be in a position to help the poor.

Reform of the system of benefices is entrusted to the Commission for
the Revision of the Code of Canon Law. Meanwhile, the bishops having
heard the councils of priests should see to it that an equitable
distribution of goods is provided for, including revenues coming from
benefices.

The same conferences should take care that at least in regions in which
the sustenance of the clergy depends entirely or in great measure on
the offerings of the faithful a special institution be established in
each diocese to collect offerings for this purpose. The administrator
of this institution is to be the bishop of the diocese who will be
assisted by delegated priests and, where it seems useful, also by
laymen skilled in economic affairs.

Finally, the same episcopal conferences should see to it that, with due
regard always for ecclesiastical and civil laws, there be in each
country, either diocesan institutions, which may also be affiliated
with each other, or institutions established for several dioceses
together, or an association established for the entire country by which
under the vigilance of the sacred hierarchy sufficient provision is
made both for suitable security and health insurance, as it is called,
and for due sustenance of the clergy who are sick, incapacitated, or
aged.

It will be the concern of the revision of the Code of Canon Law to
determine the methods according to which another common fund is to be
established in individual dioceses or regions by which the bishops will
be able to satisfy other obligations to persons serving the Church and
to meet various needs of the diocese and by which richer dioceses can
also help the poorer ones.

THE CARE OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS OF THE FAITHFUL
(NO. 18 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

9. The episcopal conferences are asked that, bearing in mind the great
number of migrants and travelers today, they assign to a priest
delegated for this purpose or to a special commission established for
this purpose everything pertaining to the study and direction of the
spiritual care of these persons.

NOMINATION OF BISHOPS
(NO. 20 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

10. The right of the Roman Pontiff to nominate and appoint bishops
freely remaining intact and without prejudice to the discipline of the
Eastern Churches, episcopal conferences according to norms established
or to be established by the Apostolic See, shall with prudent counsel
and in secret each year consider ecclesiastics to be promoted to the
office of bishops in their own territory and propose the names of the
candidates to the Apostolic See.

RESIGNATION OF BISHOPS
(NO. 21 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

11. That the prescription of No. 21 of the Decree Christus Dominus may
be put into effect, all bishops of dioceses and others who are
juridically their equals are earnestly requested of their own free will
to tender their resignation from office not later than at the
completion of their 75th year of age to the competent authority which
will make provision after examining all circumstances of individual
cases.

A bishop whose resignation from office has been accepted may maintain a
home in his diocese if he wishes. Furthermore, the diocese itself must
provide the bishop who resigns with appropriate and fitting sustenance.
It is the right of the territorial episcopal conferences to determine
by way of a general norm the ways in which dioceses must satisfy this
obligation.

DIOCESAN BOUNDARIES
(NOS. 22-24 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

12. (1) In order that diocesan boundaries can be suitably revised
episcopal conferences should subject present territorial divisions of
the churches to scrutiny, each establishing for its own territory a
special commission if the case warrants it. Therefore the status of the
dioceses must be carefully investigated in relation to territory,
personnel and means. Individual bishops directly involved and bishops
of the entire province or ecclesiastical region within whose confines a
revision of dioceses is made are to be heard. The assistance of real
experts, whether ecclesiastical or lay, is to be sought as much as
possible. Considerations based on natural locations which perhaps
suggest a change in boundaries are to be weighed dispassionately. All
changes which perhaps should be made, which are mentioned in Nos. 22-23
of the Decree Christus Dominus, should be proposed. In the division and
dismembering of dioceses due care must be taken for an equitable and
suitable distribution of priests and seminarians, taking into
consideration both the needs of carrying on the ministry of salvation
in each diocese and the special conditions and desires of the priests
and seminarians involved.

(2) For the churches of the Eastern Rites it is indeed desirable that
in determining the boundaries of eparchies the closer proximity of
those places where faithful of the same rite live be taken into
consideration.

FACULTIES OF AUXILIARY BISHOPS
(NOS. 25-26 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

13. (1) It is necessary to name auxiliary bishops for a diocese
whenever the genuine needs of the apostolate exercised in the diocese
demand it. Assuredly the well being of the Lord's flock which must be
fed, the unity of governing in the administration of the diocese, the
position as a member of the episcopal college which an auxiliary bishop
possesses, and effective cooperation with the bishop of the diocese,
constitute the chief principles which must be kept in sight when
dealing with the power to be granted to an auxiliary bishop.

(2) The bishop of the diocese must appoint the auxiliary either vicar
generalÂ--(Syncellus)Â--or episcopal vicar so that in every case,
however, he depends solely upon the authority of the bishop of the
diocese.

(3) To provide sufficiently for the common good of the diocese and to
safeguard the dignity of the auxiliary bishop, the Council has decided
to make clear its desire that when a See is vacant, the governing of
the diocese should be entrusted by those who have the right to do so to
the auxiliary, or to one of the auxiliaries if there are several.
However, unless some other provision has been made in a particular case
the competent authority, the auxiliary bishop does not, when the See
becomes vacant, lose the powers and faculties he enjoyed by law when
the See was filled, as the vicar general or as the episcopal vicar.
Then, however, an auxiliary who has not been elected to the office of
vicar capitular until the new bishop takes possession of the See enjoys
his power conferred upon him by the law to be exercised in full accord
with the vicar capitular who is in charge of the government of the
diocese.

EPISCOPAL VICARS
(NO. 27 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

14. (1) The new office of episcopal vicar has been established in the
law by the Council so that the bishop, strengthened by new
collaborators, can exercise the pastoral government of the diocese more
effectively. Therefore it is left to the decision of the bishop of the
diocese to appoint freely one or more episcopal vicars according to
special local needs. Furthermore he retains the faculty of naming one
or more vicars general according to the norms of canon 366 of the Code
of Canon Law.

(2) Episcopal vicars enjoy the ordinary vicarious power which the
common law grants to a vicar general, but in a specified part of the
diocese, or for a certain class of affairs, or for the faithful of a
certain rite or for groups of persons as specified in the nomination by
the bishop of the diocese. Therefore, within the limits of their
competence, the habitual faculties granted by the Apostolic See to the
bishop and the execution of rescripts pertain to them unless a
different arrangement has expressly been made, or unless they are
granted to the bishop by reason of personal qualifications. The bishop
of the diocese, however, is free to reserve to himself or the vicar
general the cases he chooses and likewise to give an episcopal vicar
the special mandate which is prescribed by the common law for certain
matters.

(3) As a collaborator with the episcopal office, the episcopal vicar
must refer all that has been done or is to be done by him to the bishop
of the diocese. Indeed, he should never act contrary to the mind and
will of the bishop of the diocese. Furthermore, he should not fail to
have frequent dialogue with other collaborators of the
bishopsÂ--especially the vicar general, according to the methods to be
determined by the bishop of the dioceseÂ--in order to strengthen the
unity of discipline among clergy and people and to reap more abundant
fruits in the diocese.

(4) A request refused by a vicar general or an episcopal vicar cannot
validly be granted by another vicar of the same bishop, even when the
reasons for the refusal are received from the vicar who made the
refusal of the request.

Furthermore, a request refused by a vicar general (or Syncellus) or by
an episcopal vicar and later granted by the bishop is invalid if no
mention has been made of this refusal; but if the bishop has refused a
request, even if the refusal has been mentioned, the request cannot
validly be obtained from a vicar general or an episcopal vicar without
the consent of the bishop.

(5) Episcopal vicars who are not auxiliary bishops are named for a time
to be specified in the act of appointment. They can, however, be
removed at the will of the bishop. When the See is vacant, their office
ceases unless they are auxiliary bishops. It is expedient however that
the vicar capitular use them as his delegates lest the good of the
diocese suffer some harm.

THE COUNCIL OF PRIESTS AND THE PASTORAL COUNCIL
(NO. 27 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS
AND NO. 7 OF THE DECREE PRESBYTERORUM ORDINIS)

15. In regard to the council of priests:

(1) In each diocese, according to a method and plan to be determined by
the bishop, there should be a council of priests, that is a group or
senate of priests who represent the body of priests and who by their
counsel can effectively assist the bishop in the government of the
diocese. In this council the bishop should listen to his priests,
consult them and have dialogue with them on those matters which pertain
to the needs of pastoral work and the good of the diocese.

(2) Religious may also be named members of the council of priests to
the extent that they have the care of souls and take part in the works
of the apostolate.

(3) The council of priests has only a consultative vote.

(4) When the See becomes vacant, the council of priests ceases unless
in special circumstances to be reviewed by the Holy See the vicar
capitular or apostolic administrator confirms its existence.

The new bishop will establish his own new council of priests.

16. In regard to the pastoral council, which is highly recommended by
the Decree Christus Dominus:

(1) It is the function of the pastoral council to investigate
everything pertaining to pastoral activities, to weigh them carefully
and to set forth practical conclusions concerning them so as to promote
conformity of the life and actions of the People of God with the
Gospel.

(2) The pastoral council, which has a consultative vote only, can be
set up in various ways. Ordinarily, although by its nature it is a
permanent institution, with regard to members and activity it can be
temporary and perform its function as the occasion demands. The bishop
will be able to convoke it whenever it seems opportune to him.

(3) Clerics, Religious and laity specially chosen by the bishop take
part in the pastoral council.

(4) That the purpose of this council actually be accomplished, it is
expedient that advance study precede the common effort using the
assistance, if the case warrants it, of institutes or offices which
work to this end.

(5) Where there are hierarchies of different rites in the same
territory, it is highly recommended that insofar as possible the
pastoral council be interritual in character, that is, that it be
composed of clerics, Religious and laity of the various rites.

(6) Other dispositions are left to the free determination of the bishop
of the diocese, with due regard to what is said in No. 17.

17. (1) It is expedient that in questions concerning the council of
priests and the pastoral council, and in those which touch upon their
relationships with one another or with councils of the bishop already
in existence by force of existing law, the bishops, especially when
meeting in their conferences, take common counsel and publish similar
norms for all dioceses of the territory.

Let the bishops also see to it that all diocesan councils are
coordinated in the most suitable way by means of an accurate indication
of competence, mutual participation of members in joint or successive
sessions, and other ways.

(2) In the meantime, bishops' councils already in existence by virtue
of existing law, that is the cathedral chapter, the board of consultors
and the like, if there are any, retain their own office and competence
until these bodies are revised.

SUPPRESSION OF RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
IN CONFERRING OFFICES OR BENEFICES
(NO. 28 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

18. (1) The good of souls demands that the bishop have appropriate
freedom in suitably and equitably conferring on more qualified clerics
offices and benefices, even those to which the care of souls is not
attached. The Apostolic See no longer reserves to itself the bestowal
of offices or benefices, whether the care of souls is attached or not,
except those which are consistorial. In the law of foundation of any
benefice, those clauses are henceforth prohibited which restrict the
bishop's liberty in conferring it. Privileges entailing no obligation
which may have been granted to physical or moral persons until now, and
which include the right of election, nomination or presentation for any
kind of vacant non-consistorial office or benefice are abrogated. The
customs are abrogated and the rights are taken away of nominating,
electing or presenting priests for a parochial office or benefice. The
law of competitive examinations, even for offices or benefices which do
not involve the care of souls, is suppressed.

With regard to popular elections as they are called, where such are in
force, it is the function of the episcopal conference to propose to the
Apostolic See measures which seem appropriate to bring about their
abrogation insofar as possible.

(2) If however rights and privileges in this matter have been
established by means of an agreement between the Apostolic See and a
nation, or by means of a contract entered into with physical or moral
persons, arrangements should be made with the interested parties for
their cessation.

VICARS FORANE
(NO. 30 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

19. (1) Those priests are to be considered among the more immediate
collaborators with the bishop of the diocese who exercise a pastoral
office of a supra-parochial nature; among these are the vicars forane
who are also called archpriests or deans, and among the Orientals,
Protopresbyters. Priests who are more outstanding for their learning
and apostolic zeal are to be assigned to the exercise of this office so
that, provided with the necessary faculties by the bishop, they may be
able to promote and direct common pastoral activity in the territory
entrusted to them. Consequently this office is not attached to a
particular parish.

(2) Vicars forane, archpriests or deans are to be appointed for a time
determined by particular law; however they can be removed at the will
of the bishop. It is expedient that the bishop of the diocese listen to
their opinions as often as there is a question of the appointment,
transfer or removal of pastors within the territory of which they are
in charge.

REMOVAL, TRANSFER AND RESIGNATION OF PASTORS
(NO. 31 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

20. (1) Without prejudice to the law in force with regard to Religious,
the bishop can legitimately remove any pastor from a parish whenever
his ministry, even through no grave fault of his own, becomes harmful
or at least ineffective for any of the reasons recognized by law, or
for another similar reason according to the judgment of the bishop,
following the method of procedure established for removable pastors
(canons 2157-2161 of the Code of Canon Law) until the revision of the
Code. The law of the Oriental Church is not affected by this norm.

(2) If the good of souls or the needs or welfare of the Church demand,
the bishop can transfer a pastor from the parish which he is suitably
directing to another parish or any other ecclesiastical office. If the
pastor refuses, the bishop must observe the above mentioned procedure
in all things for a valid decree of transfer.

(3) So that the prescription of No. 31 of the Decree Christus Dominus
may be carried out all pastors are asked of their own free will to
submit their resignation from office to their own bishop not later than
at the completion of their 75th year. The bishop will make the decision
whether to accept or defer the resignation after considering all
circumstances regarding the person and the place. The bishop is to
provide suitable support and housing for those who resign.

ESTABLISHMENT, SUPPRESSION AND CHANGE OF PARISHES
(NO. 32 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

21. (1) Every effort is to be made that parishes, in which apostolic
activity can be performed only with difficulty or less effectively
because of the excessive number of the faithful or too vast a territory
or for any other reason, be suitably divided or dismembered according
to the various circumstances. Likewise parishes which are too small
should be united insofar as the situation demands it and circumstances
permit.

(2) Parishes are no longer to be united pleno iure to chapters of
canons. If such united parishes exist, they are to be divided, after
consultation with both the chapter and the council of priests, and a
pastor appointedÂ--whether chosen from the members of the chapter or
notÂ--who enjoys all the faculties which belong to pastors according to
the prescriptions of the law.

(3) The bishop of the diocese on his own authority can establish or
suppress parishes or change them in any way after consultation with the
council of priests in such a way, however, that, if there be agreement
between the Apostolic See and the civil government, or rights acquired
by other physical or moral persons, the matter be suitably settled with
them by the competent authority.

RELIGIOUS
(NOS. 33-35 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

22. The norms here established apply to all Religious, men and women,
of whatever rite but the rights of Patriarchs for the Orientals remain
intact.

23. (1) All Religious, including the exempt, who work in places where a
rite different from their own is the only rite, or where the number of
faithful of the other rite is so large that in common opinion it is
considered the only rite, depend on the local Ordinary or hierarch of
this rite in those things which pertain to the external activity of the
ministry and are subject to him in accord with the norm of law.

(2) Where there are several local Ordinaries or hierarchs, however,
these Religious, when engaged in work among the faithful of different
rites, are bound by the norms which are given by the Ordinaries and
hierarchs by mutual agreement.

24. Even though in mission areas the exemption of Religious is in
effect within their own lawful sphere, nevertheless, on account of the
special circumstances of exercising the sacred ministry in these areas,
according to the intention of the Decree Ad Gentes Divinitus, the
special statutes issued or approved by the Apostolic See to regulate
the relationships between local Ordinaries and Religious superiors,
especially in a mission entrusted to an institute, must be observed.

25. (1) All Religious, even the exempt, are bound by the laws, decrees
and ordinances enacted by the local Ordinary for various activities, in
those matters which touch upon the exercise of the sacred apostolate,
as well as for pastoral and social action prescribed or recommended by
the local Ordinary.

(2) Likewise, they are bound by the laws, decrees, and ordinances
enacted by the local Ordinary or the episcopal conference which concern
the following, among other things:

(a) The public use of all instruments of social communication,
according to the norm of Nos. 20 and 21 of the Decree Inter Mirifica;

(b) Attendance at public entertainment;

(c) Enrollment in or cooperation with societies or associations which
the local Ordinary or the episcopal conference has decreed should be
avoided;

(d) Ecclesiastical attire, but without prejudice to Canon 596 of the
Code of Canon Law and Canon 139 of the Oriental Code of Canon Law
concerning Religious, and according to the following stipulation: the
local Ordinary or the episcopal conference, to avoid things that would
astonish the faithful, can forbid clerics, whether secular or
Religious, even the exempt, to wear lay dress in public.

26. Moreover, Religious are also bound by the laws and decrees issued
by the local Ordinary according to the norm of the law regarding the
public exercise of worship in their own churches and in public and
semi-public oratories if the faithful ordinarily attend them. The
proper right of the Religious remains intact which they lawfully use
for their own community alone, taking into consideration the order of
the Divine Office in choir and the sacred functions which pertain to
the special purpose of the institute.

27. (1) The episcopal conference of any country can, after consultation
with the interested Religious superiors, establish norms for seeking
alms which must be observed by all Religious, including those who by
institution are called and are mendicants, though their right to beg
remains intact.

(2) Likewise, Religious may not proceed in the collection of funds by
public subscription without the consent of the Ordinaries of those
places where the funds are collected.

28. Religious should zealously promote those works proper or special to
their own institute, that is, those which with the approval of the
Apostolic See were undertaken either from the institute's very
foundation or by reason of venerable traditions and then were defined
and ordered by the institute's constitution and other particular laws,
special consideration being given to the spiritual needs of the
dioceses and maintaining fraternal concord with the diocesan clergy and
with other institutes which perform similar works.

29. (1) Works proper or special to the institute which are carried out
in its own houses, even if these are rented, depend on the superiors of
the institute who according to the constitutions rule and direct them.
However, these works are also subject to the jurisdiction of the local
Ordinary according to the norm of law.

(2) Works which have been entrusted to the institute by the local
Ordinary, however, even though they may be proper or special to it, are
under the authority and direction of the same Ordinary, without
prejudice, however, to the right of Religious superiors to exercise
vigilance over the life of the members of the institute, and, in
combination with the local Ordinary, over the fulfillment of duties
committed to them.

30. (1) When a local Ordinary entrusts an apostolic work to an
institute, observing what must be observed according to law, a written
agreement should be entered into between the Ordinary and the competent
superior of the institute by which, among other things, the matters
pertaining to the carrying out of the work, the assignment of personnel
for the work and finances are clearly defined.

(2) For such works, members of the Religious institute who are truly
qualified are to be selected by their own Religious superior, after
mutual consultation with the local Ordinary, and if it is a case of
conferring an ecclesiastical office on one of the members, the
Religious must be named by the local Ordinary on presentation by, or at
least with the consent of, the Religious superior, for a definite
period of time set by mutual consent.

31. Also when an office is to be entrusted to a Religious by the local
Ordinary or by an episcopal conference, it should be done with the
consent of his superior and with a written agreement.

32. For a grave reason any member of a Religious institute can be
removed from the position assigned to him either at the will of the
authority who made the appointment, after he has advised the Religious
superior, or at the will of the superior after he has advised the one
who made the appointment. In this matter the superior and the authority
are legally equal and the action of the one does not require the
consent of the other, nor is the one bound to make known to the other
the reason for his judgment, much less prove it, though recourse to the
Apostolic See, without suspensive effect (in devolutivo), remains open.

33. (1) A local Ordinary can on his own authority, with the consent of
the competent Religious superior, entrust a parish to a Religious
institute even by establishing a parish in the Religious church of an
institute. This assignment of a parish can be in perpetuity or for a
certain specified time; in either case it must be done through a
written agreement between the Ordinary and the competent superior of
the institute. Among other things, this agreement is to define
expressly and accurately those matters which pertain to carrying out
the work, the assignment of personnel for the work and financial
matters.

(2) The local Ordinary can also appoint a Religious, with the
permission of his superior, as pastor of a parish which is not
entrusted to Religious, entering into a special and suitable agreement
with the competent Religious superior.

34. (1) A Religious house belonging to exempt Religious, whether
"formal" or "non-formal," cannot be suppressed without apostolic
approval and consultation with local Ordinary.

(2) Religious superiors who, for whatever reason, ask for the
suppression of any house or work, should not do so hastily. Let them
remember that all Religious have the duty to work assiduously and
diligently not only for building up and increasing the whole Mystical
Body of Christ but also for the good of the particular churches.

(3) When, however, the suppression of a house or work is requested by
superiors, especially because of insufficient personnel, the local
Ordinary is to consider the request kindly.

35. Associations of the faithful which are under the leadership and
direction of a Religious institute, even if they have been established
by the Apostolic See, are subject to the jurisdiction and vigilance of
the local Ordinary who, according to the norms of the sacred canons,
has the right and the duty of holding a visitation of them.

If these associations are engaged in external works of the apostolate
or in the promotion of divine worship, they must observe the
prescriptions given by the local Ordinary or the episcopal conference
in these matters.

36. (1) The apostolic activity of members of Institutes of perfection
who lead a life which is not totally contemplative is not so
circumscribed by the projects either proper to their institute or by
others occasionally assumed that, in keeping with urgent spiritual
needs and the lack of clergy, both priests and also all men and women
members cannot be called upon by the local Ordinary, taking into
account the special nature of each institute and with the consent of
the competent Religious superior, to render assistance in the various
ministries of dioceses of regions.

(2) If, in the judgment of the local Ordinary, the help of Religious is
considered necessary or very useful to carry on the various works of
the apostolate and to foster charitable projects and those of the
pastoral ministry in secular parishes or diocesan associations, the
requested help should be given as far as possible by Religious
superiors upon request of the Ordinary.

37. In all churches and in all public and semipublic oratories
belonging to Religious which de facto are habitually open to the
faithful, the local Ordinary can prescribe that episcopal documents be
read publicly, that catechetical instruction be given and finally that
special collections be taken up for specified parish, diocesan,
national or universal undertakings; such collections are carefully to
be sent to the episcopal curia.

38. The local Ordinary has the right, with respect to the observance of
general laws and episcopal decrees concerning divine worship to conduct
a visitation of the churches of Religious, even exempt, and also their
semipublic oratories, provided the faithful ordinarily frequent them.
If he should discover abuses in this regard, and the Religious superior
has been admonished in vain, he can himself by his own authority make
provisions.

39. (1) According to the norm of No. 35, 4 of the Decree Christus
Dominus, the right of Religious in regard to the direction of the
schools remaining in effect, and observing the norms established there
concerning the prior agreement to be mutually entered into between
bishops and Religious superiors, the general policy of the Catholic
school of Religious institutes involves the general distribution of all
Catholic schools in a diocese, their common cooperation and supervision
so that these schools no less than others may be adapted to pursue
cultural and social aims.

(2) The local Ordinary can conduct a visitation, either personally or
through a delegate, according to the norms of the sacred canons, of all
schools, colleges, oratories, recreation centers, protectorates,
hospitals, orphanages and other similar institutions of Religious
institutes devoted to works of religion or to the temporal or spiritual
works of charity, except those schools of an institute which are open
exclusively to the institute's own students.

40. Norms concerning the assignment of members of Religious institutes
to diocesan undertakings and ministries to be carried out under the
direction of the bishops are also to be applied to other projects and
ministries which go beyond the area of a diocese, with appropriate
principles adapted to similar cases.

EPISCOPAL CONFERENCES
(NO. 38 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

41. (1) Bishops of countries or territories which do not yet have an
episcopal conference according to the norms of the Decree Christus
Dominus are to see to its establishment as soon as possible, and to the
drawing up of its statutes which are to be confirmed by the Apostolic
See.

(2) Episcopal conferences already established must draw up their own
statutes according to the prescriptions of the holy Council or, if they
have already drawn them up, revise them according to the mind of the
Council and submit them to the Apostolic See for confirmation.

(3) Bishops of countries where it is difficult to establish a
conference should, after consultation with the Apostolic See, join that
conference which is more suited to the needs of the apostolate in their
own country.

(4) Episcopal conferences of several countries, or international
conferences, can be established, only with the approval of the
Apostolic See, to which it pertains to draw up special norms. Whenever
such conferences undertake actions or programs which have an
international character, however, the Holy See must be given advance
notice.

(5) Relationships between episcopal conferences, especially those of
neighboring countries, can be maintained in opportune and suitable ways
through the secretariat of these conferences. Among other things, such
relationships can include especially:

(a) Communicating the principal methods of action in pastoral matters
and activities;

(b) Forwarding writings and papers which set forth the decisions of the
conference or the acts or documents issued jointly by the bishops;

(c) Sending information about various undertakings of the apostolate,
proposed or recommended by the episcopal conference, which may be
useful in similar cases;

(d) Proposing more serious questions which seem to be of very great
importance in modern times and particular circumstances;

(e) Indicating dangers or errors arising in their own country which can
also creep into other countries, so that suitable and opportune
measures can be taken to guard against them, remove them, or constrain
them, and similar matters.

PROVINCIAL OR REGIONAL ECCLESIASTICAL BOUNDARIES
(NOS. 39-41 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

42. Episcopal conferences are to study carefully whether the more
effective promotion of the good of souls in their territory: (a)
demands more suitable boundaries for ecclesiastical provinces or (b)
suggests the establishment of ecclesiastical regions. Insofar as the
answer is affirmative plans are to be submitted to the Apostolic See
for the revision of provincial boundaries and the juridical
establishment of regions. Furthermore the conference should indicate to
the Holy See plans for the grouping together of dioceses in the
territory which have until now been immediately subject to the
Apostolic See.

DRAWING UP PASTORAL DIRECTORIES
(NO. 44 OF THE DECREE CHRISTUS DOMINUS)

43. With regard to pastoral directories, patriarchal synods and
episcopal conferences are asked to study promptly the questions which
are to be treated in both general and special directories and to
communicate their proposals and wishes to the Apostolic See as soon as
possible.

II. NORMS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECREE
OF THE SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL PERFECTAE CARITATIS

That the fruits of the Council may carefully mature, it is necessary
that Religious institutes promote first of all a renewal of spirit, and
then that they take care to carry out this renewal adapted to their
life and discipline prudently and yet skillfully by applying themselves
assiduously to the study especially of the Dogmatic Constitution Lumen
Gentium (chapters 5 and 6) and the Decree Perfectae Caritatis, and by
putting into effect the norms and teachings of the Council.

To speed up the implementation of the Decree Perfectae Caritatis the
following norms which will affect all Religious, whether Latin or
Oriental, with suitable adjustments, establish a procedure and give
certain rules.

PART I: THE MANNER OF PROMOTING THE ADAPTATION
AND RENEWAL OF RELIGIOUS LIFE

I. Concerning Those Who Are Bound To Promote Adaptation and Renewal

1. The most important role in the adaptation and renewal of the
Religious life belongs to the institutes themselves, which will
accomplish it especially through general chapters, or among the
Orientals through synaxes. The task of the chapters is not completed by
merely making laws, but especially by promoting spiritual and apostolic
vitality.

2. The cooperation of all superiors and members is necessary to renew
Religious life in themselves, to prepare the spirit of the chapters, to
carry out the works of the chapters, to observe faithfully the law and
norms enacted by the chapters.

3. A special general chapter, ordinary or extraordinary, should be
convened within two or at most three years to promote the adaptation
and renewal in each institute.

This chapter can be divided into two distinct periods, separated
generally by not more than a year, if the chapter itself so decides by
secret vote.

4. The general commission in preparing this chapter should suitably
provide for full and free consultation of the members and arrange the
results of this consultation in time so that the work of the chapter
may be helped and directed. It will be possible to accomplish this, for
example, by consulting conventual and provincial chapters, by
establishing commissions, by proposing series of questions, etc.

5. For stauropagial monasteries it shall be the duty of the patriarch
to set forth the norms for pursuing this consultation.

6. This general chapter has the right to alter certain norms of the
constitutions, or among Orientals the norms of the Typika, as an
experiment, as long as the purpose, nature and character of the
institute are preserved. Experiments contrary to the common law,
provided they are to be undertaken prudently, will be willingly
permitted by the Holy See as the occasions call for them.

These experiments can be prolonged until the next Ordinary general
chapter, which will have the faculty to continue them further but not
beyond the chapter immediately following.

7. The general council has the same faculty during the time that
intervenes between chapters of this kind, in accordance with conditions
to be determined by the chapters, and among the Orientals in
independent monasteries the Hegumen with the minor Synaxis has this
power.

8. The definitive approval of the constitutions is reserved to the
competent authority.

9. As far as the revision of the constitutions of nuns is concerned,
each monastery by means of a chapter, or even the individual nuns,
should make known their wishes which, to safeguard the unity of the
Religious family in keeping with its nature, should be collected by the
highest authority of the order, if she is present, otherwise by the
delegate of the Holy See; among Orientals, by the patriarch or the
local hierarch. The wishes and opinions can be sought from the
assemblies of the federations or from other gatherings legitimately
called together. The bishops' pastoral solicitude should also lend
benevolent assistance to this end.

10. If at times in monasteries of nuns certain experiments with respect
to observances are judged opportune for an interval, these can be
permitted by the superiors general or by delegates of the Holy See, and
among Orientals by the patriarch or the local hierarch. Yet special
consideration should be given to the special outlook and frame of mind
of those who are cloistered and who have so great a need for stability
and security.

11. It shall be the duty of those authorities mentioned above to
provide for the revision of the texts of the constitutions with the
help and consultation of the monasteries themselves and for their
submission for the approval of the Holy See or the competent hierarch.

II. Revision of Constitutions and Typika

12. The general laws of each institute (constitutions, Typika, rules or
whatever name they bear) should ordinarily include these elements:

(a) The evangelical and theological principles of the religious life
and of its union with the Church and suitable and clear words in which
"the spirit of the founders and their specific aims and healthy
traditions, all of which constitute the patrimony of each institute,
are acknowledged and preserved." (No. 2b of the Decree Perfectae
Caritatis);

(b) The necessary juridical norms for defining clearly the character,
purpose and means of the institute, which norms should not be
excessively multiplied but should always be presented in an adequate
manner.

13. The union of both elements, spiritual and juridical, is necessary
so that the principal codes of the institutes have a stable foundation
and that the true spirit and life-giving norm pervade them; care must
therefore be taken that a merely juridical or purely exhortatory text
is not composed.

14. Those matters which are now obsolete, or subject to change
according to a particular era, or which correspond with merely local
usages should be excluded from the fundamental code of the institutes.

Those norms however which correspond with the needs of the present
time, the physical and psychological conditions of the members and
particular circumstances should be set down in supplementary codes
called "directories," books of customs, or in books bearing other
titles.

III. The Criteria of Renewal and Adaptation

15. The norms and spirit to which adaptation and renewal must
correspond should be gathered not only from the Decree Perfectae
Caritatis but also from other documents of the Second Vatican Council,
especially from chapters 5 and 6 of the Dogmatic Constitution Lumen
Gentium.

16. The institutes should take care that the principles established in
No. 2 of the Decree Perfectae Caritatis actually pervade the renewal of
their religious life; therefore:

(1) Study and meditation on the Gospels and the whole of Sacred
Scripture should be more earnestly fostered by all members from the
beginning of their novitiate. Likewise, care should be taken that they
share in the mystery and life of the Church in more suitable ways;

(2) The various aspects (theological, historical, canonical, etc.) of
the doctrine of the religious life should be investigated and
explained.

(3) To achieve the good of the Church, the institutes should strive for
a genuine knowledge of their original spirit, so that faithfully
preserving this spirit in determining adaptations, their religious life
may thus be purified of alien elements and freed from those which are
obsolete.

17. Those elements are to be considered obsolete which do not
constitute the nature and purpose of the institute and which, having
lost their meaning and power, are no longer a real help to religious
life. Nevertheless, consideration must be given to the witness which
the religious state has as its role the obligation of giving.

18. The form of government should be such that "the chapters and
councilsÂ... each in its own way express the participation and concern
of all the members for the welfare of the whole community" (No. 14 of
the Decree Perfectae Caritatis). This will be realized especially if
the members have a really effective part in selecting the members of
these chapters and councils. Similarly the form of government should be
such that the exercise of authority is made more effective and
unhindered according to modern needs. Therefore, superiors on every
level should be given sufficient powers so that useless and too
frequent recourse to higher authorities is not multiplied.

19. Nevertheless, suitable renewal cannot be made once and for all but
should be encouraged in a continuing way, with the help of the zeal of
the members and the solicitude of the chapters and superiors.

PART II: SOME THINGS TO BE ADAPTED
AND RENEWED IN THE RELIGIOUS LIFE

I. The Divine Office of Brothers and Sisters
(NO. 3 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

20. Although Religious who recite a duly approved Little Office perform
the public prayer of the Church (cf. Constitution Sacrosanctum
Concilium, No. 98), it is nevertheless recommended to the institutes
that in place of the Little Office they adopt the Divine Office either
in part or in whole so that they may participate more intimately in the
liturgical life of the Church. Religious of the Eastern Rites, however,
should recite the doxologies and the Divine Lauds according to their
own Typika and customs.

II. Mental Prayer
(NO. 6 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

21. In order that Religious may more intimately and fruitfully
participate in the most holy mystery of the Eucharist and the public
prayer of the Church, and that their whole spiritual life may be
nourished more abundantly, a larger place should be given to mental
prayer instead of a multitude of prayers, retaining nevertheless the
pious exercises commonly accepted in the Church and giving due care
that the members are instructed diligently in leading a spiritual life.

III. Mortification
(NOS. 5 AND 12 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

22. Religious should devote themselves to works of penance and
mortification more than the rest of the faithful. However, the special
penitential practices of institutes should be revised insofar as it is
necessary so that, taking into account traditions, whether of the East
or of the West, and modern circumstances, the members may in practice
be able to observe them, adopting new forms also drawn from modern
conditions of life.

IV. On Poverty
(No. 13 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

23. Institutes especially through their general chapters should
diligently and in concrete manner promote the spirit and practice of
poverty according to the intention of No. 13 of the Decree Perfectae
Caritatis while also seeking and urging new ways in keeping with the
nature of their institute to make the practice and witness of poverty
more effective in modern times.

24. It is the right of institutes with simple vows to decree in general
chapter whether the renunciation of inheritances which have been
acquired and will be acquired should be incorporated into the
constitutions and, if this is done, whether such renunciation should be
obligatory or optional. They should also decide when this is to be
done, that is, whether before perpetual profession or some years later.

V. Living the Common Life
(NO. 15 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

25. In institutes devoted to works of the apostolate the common life,
which is so important for Religious as a family united in Christ to
renew fraternal cooperation, should be promoted by every means possible
in a manner suitable to the vocation of the institute.

26. In institutes of this kind the order of the day cannot always be
the same in all their houses, nor at times in the same house for all
the members. The order, however, is always to be so arranged that the
Religious, aside from the time given to spiritual things and to works,
should also have some periods to themselves and be able to enjoy
suitable recreation.

27. General chapters and synaxes should explore ways is which members
who are called "conversi," "cooperatores," or by any other such name,
may gradually obtain an active vote in specified community actions and
elections and also a passive vote in the case of certain offices. Thus
indeed it will come about that they are closely joined with the life
and works of the community and the priests will be freer to devote
themselves to their own ministry.

28. In monasteries where the stage of having one class of nun has been
achieved, choir obligations should be defined in the constitutions,
taking into consideration the diversity of persons which the
distinction of activities and special vocations requires.

29. Sisters devoted to the external service of the monasteries, whether
called oblates or some other name, should be governed by special
statutes in which consideration should be given to the needs of their
vocation which is not contemplative only and also to the needs of the
vocation of the nuns with whom their lives are joined, even though they
themselves areÂ--not nuns.

The superioress of the monastery has a grave obligation to have
solicitous care for these Sisters, to provide them with a fitting
religious training, to treat them with a true sense of charity and to
promote a bond of sisterliness between them and the community of nuns.

VI. The Cloister of Nuns
(NO. 16 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

30. The papal enclosure of monasteries must be considered an ascetical
institution closely joined to the special vocation of nuns. The
enclosure is a sign, safeguard and special expression of their
withdrawal from the world.

Nuns of the Oriental rites should observe their own cloister in the
same spirit.

31. This enclosure should be arranged in such a way that material
separation from the outside world is always preserved. Individual
Religious families, according to their own spirit, can establish and
define in their constitutions particular norms for this material
separation.

32. Minor enclosure is abolished. Nuns, therefore, who by their rule
are devoted to external works should define their own enclosure in
their constitutions. However, nuns who, although contemplative by the
rule, have taken up external works, after a suitable time which is
granted them to deliberate, should either retain the papal enclosure
and give up their external works or, continuing these works, should
define their own enclosure in their constitutions, retaining their
status as nuns.

VII. The Training of Religious
(NO. 18 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

33. The training of Religious beginning with the novitiate should not
be organized in the same way in all institutes, but the special
character of each institute should be considered. In the revision and
adaptation of this training an adequate and prudent place is to be
given for experience.

34. Those precepts set down in the Decree Optatam Totius (On the
Training of Priests), adapted to suit the character of each institute,
are to be observed faithfully in the education of Religious clerics.

35. Further training after the novitiate is to be given in a way
suitable to each institute. This training is altogether necessary for
all members, even for those living a contemplative life, for Brothers
in lay religious institutes and for Sisters in institutes dedicated to
apostolic works, such as now exists in many institutes and are called
juniorates, scholasticates and the like. This training should generally
be extended over the entire period of temporary vows.

36. This training is to be given in suitable houses and, lest it be
purely theoretical, should for the sake of the inexperienced be
complemented by the performance of works and duties in keeping with the
nature and circumstances proper to each institute in such a way that
they gradually become part of the life to be lived in the future.

37. While always maintaining the formation proper to each institute,
when individual institutes cannot give adequate doctrinal or technical
training this can be provided by the fraternal collaboration of many.
This collaboration can take various forms at different levels: common
lectures or courses, loan of teachers, associations of teachers,
sharing of facilities in a common school to be attended by members of
several institutes.

Institutes equipped with the necessary means should willingly assist
others.

38. After adequate experimentation, each institute is to prepare its
own suitable norms for the formation of its members.

VIII. The Union and Suppression of Institutes
(NOS. 21-22 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

39. Promoting any kind of union between institutes presupposes a
suitable spiritual, psychological and juridical preparation, according
to the intention of the Decree Perfectae Caritatis. For this purpose it
will often be profitable that the institutes be helped be some
assistant approved by the competent authority.

40. In the aforementioned cases and circumstances the good of the
Church is to be kept in view, but with the consideration for the
specific character of each institute as well as to the freedom of
individual members.

41. Among the criteria that can contribute to forming a judgment on the
suppression of an institute or monastery, taking all the circumstances
into account, the following especially are to be considered together:
the small number of Religious in proportion to the age of the institute
or the monastery, the lack of candidates over a period of several
years, the advanced age of the majority of its members. If a decision
for suppression is reached, provision should be made that the institute
be joined "if it is possible, with another more vigorous institute or
monastery not much different in purpose and spirit" (No 21 of the
Decree Perfectae Caritatis). The individual Religious, however, should
be consulted beforehand and all should be done with charity.

IX. On Conferences or Unions of Major Superiors of Men and Women
(NO. 23 OF THE DECREE PERFECTAE CARITATIS)

42. Care is to be taken that the union of superiors general of men and
women can be heard and consulted by means of a council established at
the Sacred Congregation for Religious.

43. It is of greatest importance that national conferences or unions of
major superiors of men and women cooperate with episcopal conferences
with confidence and reverence (cfr. No. 35 of the Decree Christus
Dominus; No. 33 of the Decree Ad Gentes Divinitus).

Therefore it is hoped that questions involving both sides be discussed
in mixed commissions composed of both bishops and major superiors of
men or women.

CONCLUSION

44. These norms, to be in force for Religious of the whole Church,
leave untouched the general laws of the Church, both of the Latin
Church and of the Eastern Churches and the special laws of Religious
institutes, unless they explicitly or implicitly change them.

III. NORMS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECREE
OF THE SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL AD GENTES DIVINITUS

Since the Decree Ad Gentes Divinitus (On the Missionary Activity of the
Church) of the Holy Second Vatican Council must be in force for the
universal Church and be faithfully observed by everyone so that the
whole Church may become truly missionary and the entire People of God
become aware of its missionary obligation, local Ordinaries should see
to it that the Decree comes to the knowledge of all the faithful.
Discourses on the Decree should be given to the clergy and sermons
preached to the people in which everyone's responsibility in conscience
with regard to missionary activity is pointed out and inculcated.

To apply the Decree more readily and faithfully, the following are set
down:

1. Mission Theology should be so incorporated in the teaching and
development of theological doctrine that the missionary nature of the
Church may be fully brought to light. In addition, the Lord's plans of
preparing for the Gospel and the possibility of salvation for those to
whom the Gospel has not been preached are to be examined and the
necessity of evangelization and incorporation in the Church is to be
made clear.
(Ch. 1 of the Decree Ad Gentes Divinitus)

All these points are then to be taken into account in arranging studies
in seminaries and universities in the proper sequence. (No. 39)

2. Episcopal conferences are invited to propose to the Holy See as soon
as possible more general questions pertaining to the missions which can
be dealt with in the coming meeting of the Synod of Bishops. (No. 29)

3. To increase the missionary spirit among the Christian people, daily
prayers and sacrifices are to be encouraged so that the annual mission
day will become as it were a spontaneous expression of that spirit.
(No. 36)

Bishops or episcopal conferences should prepare various invocations on
behalf of the missions to be inserted in the Prayer of the Faithful at
Mass.

4. A priest should be appointed in each diocese for the effective
promotion of missionary undertakings, and he should be a member of the
pastoral council of the diocese. (No. 38)

5. To promote the missionary spirit, seminarians and young people in
Catholic organizations should be encouraged to establish and maintain
contact with seminarians and similar organizations in mission lands, so
that an exchange of knowledge may foster among the Christian people a
missionary and ecclesial awareness. (No. 38)

6. Realizing the urgency of the evangelization of the world, bishops
should promote missionary vocations among their own clergy and youth;
and they should provide institutes engaged in missionary work with the
means and opportunity to make the diocese aware of the needs of the
missions and to inspire missionary vocations. (No. 38)

In fostering vocations for the missions, the Church's mission to all
peoples and the ways in which various institutes, priests, Religious
and laity of both sexes strive to fulfill this mission should be
diligently explained. Particular emphasis should be given to the
special missionary vocation "for life" (Nos. 23-24), and illustrative
examples should be given.

7. The pontifical mission societies are to be promoted in every diocese
and their statutes, particularly those which deal with the transmission
of subsidies, should be duly observed. (No. 38)

8. Since the voluntary contributions of the faithful for the missions
are not at all sufficient, it is recommended that, as soon as possible,
there be established a certain fitting contribution to be made annually
by the diocese itself and by the parishes and other diocesan groups
from their own income and to be distributed by the Holy See, while
other contributions made by the faithful remain intact. (No. 38)

9. In the episcopal conferences there should be an episcopal commission
for the missions which will have the duty of fostering missionary
activity, mission awareness, coordinated arrangements for cooperation
among the dioceses, and also of maintaining relations with other
episcopal conferences and seeking ways to maintain equity as far as
possible in missionary aid. (No. 38)

10. Since missionary institutes remain extremely necessary, let all
recognize that they have an office of evangelization entrusted to them
by ecclesiastical authority to carry out the missionary duty of the
entire People of God. (No. 27)

11. Bishops should also use missionary institutes to inspire the
faithful with zeal for things missionary and they should, observing the
right order, provide opportunities for these institutes to arouse and
foster mission vocations among youth and to seek contributions. (Nos.
23, 37, 38)

However, to maintain greater unity and efficiency, bishops should make
use of the national or regional mission council which will consist of
the directors of the pontifical mission societies and the missionary
institutes functioning in the country or region.

12. Each missionary institute should immediately take steps toward its
own adaptation and renewal, particularly regarding its methods of
preaching the Gospel and of Christian initiation and its form of
community life (No. 3 of the Decree Perfectae Caritatis).

13. (1) There is to be but one competent curial office (dicasterium)
for all the missions, namely the Sacred Congregation for the
Propagation of the Faith. But since certain missions are for special
reasons temporarily still subject to other curial offices, a missionary
section should in the meantime be established in these offices which
will maintain close relations with the Sacred Congregation for the
Propagation of the Faith so as to provide a completely constant and
uniform method and norm in the organization and direction of all the
missions.

(2) Subject to the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith
are: the Pontifical Mission Societies, that is, the Pontifical Society
for the Propagation of the Faith, the Society of St. Peter for the
native clergy, the Missionary Union of the Clergy and the Holy
Childhood Association.

14. The president of the Secretariat for Christian Unity, by reason of
his office, is a member of the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation
of the Faith; the secretary of this secretariat is one of the
consultors of the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith.
(No. 29)

The Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith is to be
represented in like manner in the Secretariat for Christian Unity.

15. Unless in individual cases the Supreme Pontiff decrees otherwise,
24 representatives take part in the direction of the Sacred
Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith with a deliberative vote.
These are: 12 prelates from the missions, 4 from other regions, 4 from
the superiors of institutes, 4 from the pontifical mission societies.
All will be called together twice a year. Members of this body are to
be named for five-year terms, with approximately one-fifth changed each
year. On completion of their term, they can be named for another five
years.

Episcopal conferences, however, institutes and the pontifical mission
societies, observing norms to be communicated as soon as possible by
the Apostolic See, are to propose the names from which the Supreme
Pontiff will choose the above-mentioned representatives and also the
names of those, even if they live in the missions, from whom consultors
can be chosen.

16. Representatives of Religious institutes in the missions, of
regional mission societies and lay councils, especially those which are
international, are to take part in meetings of this curial office with
a consultative vote. (No. 29)

17. The Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith after
consultation with episcopal conferences and missionary institutes
should as soon as possible outline general principles according to
which agreements should be made between the local Ordinaries and
missionary institutes to govern their mutual relations. (No. 32)

In making these agreements the continuance of missionary activity and
the needs of the institutes are to be taken into account.

18. Because it is desirable that episcopal conferences in the missions
be united in organic groups according to the so-called socio-cultural
areas (see No. 9 above) the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of
the Faith (No. 29) should promote such coordinations of episcopal
conferences.

It is the function of these conferences, in collaboration with the
Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith:

(1) To explore methods, even new ones, by which the faithful and the
missionary institutes by uniting forces must incorporate themselves
into the peoples or groups with whom they live or to whom they are sent
(Nos. 10-11), and with whom they must undertake the dialogue of
salvation;

(2) To establish study groups to investigate peoples' ways of thinking
about the universe, man and his attitude towards God, and to give
theological consideration to whatever is good and true. (No. 22)

Such theological study should provide the necessary foundation for the
adaptations which must be made, and which the study groups should
investigate. These adaptations should among other things give attention
to methods of preaching the Gospel, liturgical forms, the religious
life and ecclesiastical legislation. (No. 19)

With regard to perfecting methods of evangelization and catechesis
(Nos. 13-14), the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith
should promote close cooperation among the higher institutes of
pastoral studies.

With regard to liturgical forms, the study groups should submit
documents and proposals to the council for the implementation of the
Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy.

As far as the religious condition is concerned (No. 18), care should be
taken lest more attention be given to exterior forms (such as gestures,
dress, the arts, etc.) than to the religious dispositions of the
peoples which are to be adopted and the evangelical perfection which is
to be assimilated.

(3) To promote at stated times meetings of seminary teachers to adapt
study programs and to exchange information, and by conferring with the
study groups mentioned above to provide more suitably for modern needs
in the training of priests. (No. 16).

(4) To investigate a more suitable method by which personnel (priests,
catechists, institutes, etc.) can be distributed in the territory
especially to make better provision for the lack of personnel in
densely populated places.

19. In the distribution of subsidies, a suitable share is to be set
aside each year for the training and support of local clergy, the
missionaries and catechists, and for the study groups mentioned above
in No. 18. Bishops should present documentation on these matters to the
Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith. (Nos. 17, 29)

20. A pastoral council should be duly established which according to
No. 27 of the Decree Christus Dominus will have the duty to
"investigate pastoral works, to weigh them and to formulate practical
conclusions regarding them." They are also to devote themselves to the
preparation of a diocesan synod and to see to the implementation of the
synodal statutes.(No. 30)

21. Conferences and unions of men Religious and of women Religious are
to be established in the missions in which the major superiors of all
the institutes of the same country or region are to participate and by
which their projects are to be coordinated.(No. 33).

22. Scientific institutes should be increased in the missions according
to needs and possibilities. These should work together with concerted
effort so that the labors of research and specialization are properly
organized; care should be taken to avoid duplication of projects of the
same nature in the same region (No. 34).

23. Cooperation with missionary bishops is necessary in order that
immigrants from mission countries may be properly received and assisted
by fitting pastoral care from bishops in established Christian
countries (No. 38).

24. Regarding laymen in the missions:

(1) The sincere intention of serving the missions, maturity, suitable
preparation, professional specialization as it is called, and a
suitable time to be spent in the missions are to be urged.

(2) Lay mission organizations should be efficiently coordinated.

(3) The bishop of the mission should be solicitous for the welfare of
such laymen.

(4) Social security is to be assured for these laymen (No. 41).

