APOSTOLIC CONSTITUTION
EPISCOPALIS COMMUNIO
OF THE HOLY FATHER FRANCIS
ON THE SYNOD OF BISHOPS

1. Episcopal communion (episcopalis communio), with and under Peter, is
manifested in a particular way in the Synod of Bishops. Instituted by
[20]Paul VI on 15 September 1965, the Synod of Bishops is one of the
most precious fruits of the [21]Second Vatican Council.[22][1] Ever
since then, the Synod - new as an institution but ancient in its
inspiration - has provided an effective support to the Roman Pontiff,
through channels that he himself established, in matters of greater
importance; that is to say, those requiring special knowledge and
judgment for the good of the whole Church. In this way the Synod of
Bishops, "representing the entire Catholic episcopate, demonstrates the
fact that all the Bishops are in hierarchical communion in solicitude
for the universal Church".[23][2]

For over fifty years, the Synod Assemblies have proved a valuable
instrument of shared knowledge among the Bishops, of common prayer,
honest exchange, deepening of Christian doctrine, reform of
ecclesiastical structures and promotion of pastoral activity throughout
the world. In this way, not only have these Assemblies served as a
privileged locus of interpretation and reception of the rich conciliar
Magisterium, but they have also given a significant impetus to
subsequent papal Magisterium.

Today, too, at a point in history when the Church is embarking upon a
"new chapter of evangelization"[24][3] requiring her to be "throughout
the world... permanently in a state of mission",[25][4] the Synod of
Bishops is called, like every other ecclesiastical institution, to
become ever more "suitably channelled for the evangelization of today's
world rather than for her self-preservation".[26][5] Above all,
recognizing that "the task of proclaiming the Gospel everywhere in the
world falls primarily on the body of Bishops", the Synod needs, in the
words of the Council, to "give special consideration to missionary
activity, which is the greatest and holiest task of the Church".[27][6]

2. It is providential that the Synod of Bishops was instituted in the
context of the last Ecumenical Council. In fact, the [28]Second Vatican
Council, following in the footsteps of the [29]First Vatican
Council,[30][7] deepened the doctrine of the episcopate within the
authentic ecclesiastical Tradition, focusing particularly on its
sacramentality and its collegial nature.[31][8] It emerged very clearly
that each Bishop possesses simultaneously and inseparably
responsibility for the particular Church assigned to his pastoral care
and solicitude for the universal Church.[32][9]

This solicitude, which expresses the supra-diocesan dimension of the
episcopal munus, is exercised in solemn form in an Ecumenical Council
and is also expressed in the united action of Bishops dispersed
throughout the world, when this action is proclaimed as such or freely
accepted by the Roman Pontiff.[33][10] It must be remembered that it
pertains to him, according to the needs of the People of God, to select
and promote ways in which the College of Bishops can exercise its
proper authority over the universal Church.[34][11]

In the course of the conciliar discussions, alongside the doctrine on
episcopal collegiality, the request also emerged several times for some
Bishops to be associated with the universal ministry of the Roman
Pontiff via a permanent central body, distinct from the dicasteries of
the Roman Curia; it was hoped that this body, beyond the solemn and
extraordinary form of the Ecumenical Council, would manifest the
solicitude of the College of Bishops for the needs of the People of God
and for communion among all the Churches.

3. [35]On 14 September 1965, in response to these requests, [36]Paul VI
announced to the Council Fathers, gathered for the opening of the
fourth session of the Ecumenical Council, the decision, taken on his
own initiative and by his own power, to institute a body known as the
Synod of Bishops. This body "composed of Bishops, appointed for the
most part by the Episcopal Conferences, with our approval, will be
summoned by the Roman Pontiff, according to the needs of the Church,
for consultation and collaboration when, for the general good of the
Church, he deems it opportune".

In the Motu Proprio [37]Apostolica Sollicitudo, promulgated the
following day, [38]Paul VI instituted the Synod of Bishops, "whereby
Bishops chosen from various parts of the world are to offer more
effective assistance to the supreme Pastor of the Church". The Synod
would be "constituted in such a way that it is 1) a central
ecclesiastical institution; 2) representing the whole Catholic
episcopate; 3) of its nature perpetual; 4) as for structure, carrying
out its function for a time and when called upon".[39][12]

The Synod of Bishops, whose name evokes the Church's ancient and very
rich synodal tradition, held in particular esteem by the Eastern
Churches, would normally exercise a consultative role, offering
information and counsel to the Roman Pontiff on various ecclesial
questions, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit. At the same time, the
Synod might also enjoy deliberative power, should the Roman Pontiff
wish to grant this.[40][13]

4. When instituting the Synod as a "special permanent council of sacred
Pastors", [41]Paul VI knew that "like every human institution, [it]
could be further improved with the passage of time".[42][14] Its later
development has been fed on the one hand by ongoing reception of the
fruitful conciliar teaching on episcopal collegiality and on the other
hand by the experience of the numerous Synodal Assemblies held in Rome
since 1967, when the Ordo Synodi Episcoporum was first published.

Likewise, after the promulgation of the Code of Canon Law and the Code
of Canons of the Eastern Churches, which made the Synod of Bishops part
of universal law,[43][15] the Synod continued to gradually evolve,
until the latest edition of the Ordo Synodi was promulgated by
[44]Benedict XVI on 29 September 2006. In particular, the General
Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops, consisting of the General
Secretary and a special Council of Bishops, was instituted and
gradually strengthened in its proper functions, so that the structural
stability of the Synod might be better maintained during the periods
between the various Synodal Assemblies.

In these years, noting the effectiveness of synodal action vis-à-vis
questions that require timely and united intervention from the Church's
Pastors, there has been a growing wish for the Synod to become more and
more a specific manifestation and effective implementation of the
solicitude of the episcopate for all the Churches. [45]John Paul II
stated that "perhaps this instrument can be further improved. Perhaps
the collegial pastoral responsibility can be expressed in the Synod
even more fully".[46][16]

5. For these reasons, since the beginning of my Petrine ministry, I
have paid special attention to the Synod of Bishops, confident that it
can experience "further development so as to do even more to promote
dialogue and cooperation among Bishops themselves and between them and
the Bishop of Rome".[47][17] Underpinning this work of renewal must be
the firm conviction that all Bishops are appointed for the service of
the holy People of God, to whom they themselves belong through the
sacrament of Baptism.

It is certainly true, as the [48]Second Vatican Council teaches, that
"when Bishops engage in teaching, in communion with the Roman Pontiff,
they deserve respect from all, as the witnesses of divine and catholic
truth; the faithful must agree with the judgment of their Bishop on
faith and morals, which he delivers in the name of Christ; they must
give it their adherence with religious assent of the mind".[49][18] But
it is also true that "for every Bishop the life of the Church and life
in the Church is the condition for exercising his mission to
teach".[50][19]

Hence the Bishop is both teacher and disciple. He is a teacher when,
endowed with the special assistance of the Holy Spirit, he proclaims to
the faithful the word of truth in the name of Christ, head and
shepherd. But he is a disciple when, knowing that the Spirit has been
bestowed upon every baptized person, he listens to the voice of Christ
speaking through the entire People of God, making it "infallible in
credendo".[51][20] Indeed, "the universal body made up of the faithful,
whom the Holy One has anointed (cf. 1 Jn 2:20, 27), is incapable of
erring in belief. This is a property which belongs to the people as a
whole; a supernatural sense of faith is the means by which they make
this property manifest, when `from Bishops to the last of the lay
faithful', they show universal agreement in matters of faith and
morals".[52][21] So the Bishop is called to lead his flock by "walking
in front of them, showing them the way, showing them the path; walking
in their midst, to strengthen them in unity; walking behind them, to
make sure no one gets left behind but especially, never to lose the
scent of the People of God in order to find new roads. A Bishop who
lives among his faithful has his ears open to listen to `what the
Spirit says to the churches' (Rev 2:7), and to the `voice of the
sheep', also through those diocesan institutions whose task it is to
advise the Bishop, promoting a loyal and constructive
dialogue".[53][22]

6. Similarly, the Synod of Bishops must increasingly become a
privileged instrument for listening to the People of God: "For the
Synod Fathers we ask the Holy Spirit first of all for the gift of
listening: to listen to God, that with him we may hear the cry of the
people; to listen to the people until breathing in the desire to which
God calls us".[54][23]

Although structurally it is essentially configured as an episcopal
body, this does not mean that the Synod exists separately from the rest
of the faithful. On the contrary, it is a suitable instrument to give
voice to the entire People of God, specifically via the Bishops,
established by God as "authentic guardians, interpreters and witnesses
of the faith of the whole Church",[55][24] demonstrating, from one
Assembly to another, that it is an eloquent expression of synodality as
a "constitutive element of the Church".[56][25]

Therefore, as [57]John Paul II declared, "Every General Assembly of the
Synod of Bishops is a powerful ecclesial experience, even if some of
its practical procedures can always be perfected. The Bishops assembled
in Synod represent in the first place their own Churches, but they are
also attentive to the contributions of the Episcopal Conferences which
selected them and whose views about questions under discussion they
then communicate. They thus express the recommendation of the entire
hierarchical body of the Church and finally, in a certain sense, the
whole Christian people, whose pastors they are".[58][26]

7. The history of the Church bears ample witness to the importance of
consultation for ascertaining the views of the Bishops and the faithful
in matters pertaining to the good of the Church. Hence, even in the
preparation of Synodal Assemblies, it is very important that
consultation of all the particular Churches be given special attention.
In this initial phase, following the indications of the General
Secretariat of the Synod, the Bishops submit the questions to be
explored in the Synodal Assembly to the priests, deacons and lay
faithful of their Churches, both individually and in associations,
without overlooking the valuable contribution that consecrated men and
women can offer. Above all, the contribution of the local Church's
participatory bodies, especially the Presbyteral Council and the
Pastoral Council, can prove fundamental, and from here "a synodal
Church can begin to emerge".[59][27]

During every Synodal Assembly, consultation of the faithful must be
followed by discernment on the part of the Bishops chosen for the task,
united in the search for a consensus that springs not from worldly
logic, but from common obedience to the Spirit of Christ. Attentive to
the sensus fidei of the People of God - "which they need to distinguish
carefully from the changing currents of public opinion"[60][28] - the
members of the Assembly offer their opinion to the Roman Pontiff so
that it can help him in his ministry as universal Pastor of the Church.
From this perspective, "the fact that the Synod ordinarily has only a
consultative role does not diminish its importance. In the Church the
purpose of any collegial body, whether consultative or deliberative, is
always the search for truth or the good of the Church. When it is
therefore a question involving the faith itself, the consensus
ecclesiae is not determined by the tallying of votes, but is the
outcome of the working of the Spirit, the soul of the one Church of
Christ".[61][29] Therefore the vote of the Synod Fathers, "if morally
unanimous, has a qualitative ecclesial weight which surpasses the
merely formal aspect of the consultative vote".[62][30]

Finally, the Synod Assembly itself must be followed by the
implementation phase, so as to initiate the reception of the Synod's
conclusions in all the local Churches, once they have been accepted by
the Roman Pontiff in the manner he judges most appropriate. Here it
must be remembered that "cultures are in fact quite diverse, and every
general principle... needs to be inculturated, if it is to be respected
and applied".[63][31] In this way, it can be seen that the synodal
process not only has its point of departure but also its point of
arrival in the People of God, upon whom the gifts of grace bestowed by
the Holy Spirit through the gathering of Bishops in Assembly must be
poured out.

8. The Synod of Bishops, which is "in some manner the image" of an
Ecumenical Council and reflects its "spirit and method",[64][32] is
composed of Bishops. Nevertheless, as also happened at the
Council,[65][33] certain others who are not Bishops may be summoned to
the Synod Assembly; their role is determined in each case by the Roman
Pontiff. In this connection, special consideration must be given to the
contribution that can be offered by members of Institutes of
Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life.

Besides the members, certain invited guests without voting rights may
attend the Synod Assembly. These include Experts (Periti), who help
with the redaction of documents; Auditors (Auditores), who have
particular competence regarding the issues under discussion; Fraternal
Delegates from Churches and Ecclesial Communities not yet in full
communion with the Catholic Church. To these may be added further
special guests (Invitati Speciales), chosen because of their
acknowledged authority.

The Synod of Bishops meets in various types of gathering.[66][34] If
circumstances so suggest, a single Synodal Assembly may be spread over
more than one session. Each Assembly, whatever its format, is an
important opportunity for collective listening to what the Holy Spirit
"is saying to the churches" (Rev 2:7). In the course of the synodal
deliberations, then, particular importance should be attached to
liturgical celebrations and other forms of common prayer, so as to
invoke the gifts of discernment and harmony upon the members of the
assembly. It is also right and just, following an ancient synodal
tradition, that the Book of the Gospels be solemnly enthroned at the
start of each day, symbolically reminding all the participants of the
need for docility to the divine word, which is the "word of truth" (Col
1:5).

9. The General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops - consisting of the
General Secretary, who chairs it, the Undersecretary, who assists the
General Secretary in all his activities, and some special Councils of
Bishops - is chiefly concerned with implementation of the preceding
Synodal Assembly and preparation for the following one. In the phase
preceding the Assembly, it chooses the themes to be discussed in the
Synod Assembly from those proposed by the episcopate, it sees to their
precise determination in relation to the needs of the People of God,
and it initiates the consultative process and the drafting of the
preparatory documents, incorporating the results of the consultation.
In the phase following the Assembly, on the other hand, together with
the competent dicastery of the Roman Curia, it sees to the
implementation of the synodal recommendations approved by the Roman
Pontiff.

Among the Councils that make up the General Secretariat, giving it its
particular structure, special mention should be made of the Ordinary
Council, consisting for the most part of diocesan Bishops elected by
the Fathers of the Ordinary General Assembly. Ever since it was
instituted in 1971 for the preparation and implementation of the
Ordinary General Assembly, it has amply demonstrated its usefulness,
responding as it were to the desire of the Council Fathers who asked
for some Bishops to be co-opted from among those with pastoral
responsibilities in various parts of the world, as long-term
collaborators of the Roman Pontiff in his ministry as Universal Pastor.
In addition to the Ordinary Council, other Councils may be set up
within the General Secretariat, so as to prepare and implement Synodal
Assemblies other than the Ordinary General Assembly.

At the same time, the General Secretariat is at the constant disposal
of the Roman Pontiff for whatever he may wish to ask of it, so as to
avail himself of the sure counsel of Bishops in daily contact with the
People of God, even outside the context of synodal gatherings.

10. Another fruit of the Synod of Bishops is that it highlights more
and more the profound communion that exists in Christ's Church both
between the Pastors and the faithful (every ordained minister being a
baptized person among other baptized persons, established by God to
feed his flock), and also between the Bishops and the Roman Pontiff,
the Pope being a "Bishop among Bishops, called at the same time - as
Successor of Peter - to lead the Church of Rome which presides in
charity over all the Churches".[67][35] This prevents any one subject
from existing independently of the other.

In particular, the College of Bishops never exists without its
Head;[68][36]but likewise, the Bishop of Rome, who possesses "full,
supreme, universal power over the Church, and... is always able to
exercise it without impediment,"[69][37]"is always joined in full
communion with the other Bishops, and indeed with the whole
Church".[70][38] In this regard, "there is no doubt that the Bishop of
Rome is in need of the presence of his Brother Bishops, of their
guidance and of their prudence and experience. Indeed, the Successor of
Peter must proclaim to all who `Christ, the Son of the Living God' is,
and at the same time he must pay attention to what the Holy Spirit
inspires on the lips of those who -- accepting the word of Jesus who
declares: `you are Peter' (cf. Mt 16:16-18) -- fully participate in the
Apostolic College".[71][39]

Moreover, I am confident that, by encouraging a "conversion of the
Papacy... which can help make the exercise of my ministry more faithful
to the meaning which Jesus Christ wished to give it and to the present
needs of evangelization,"[72][40] the activity of the Synod of Bishops
will be able to make its own contribution to the reestablishment of
unity among all Christians, according to the will of the Lord (cf. Jn
17:21). By doing so, it will help the Catholic Church, according to the
desire expressed years ago by [73]John Paul II, to "find a way of
exercising the primacy which, while in no way renouncing what is
essential to its mission, is nonetheless open to a new
situation".[74][41]

In accordance with canon 342 of the Code of Canon Law and with the
above considerations in mind, I hereby decree and establish the
following:

I. Synod Assemblies

Art. 1

Presidency and Format of the Synod Assemblies

§1. The Synod of Bishops is directly subject to the Roman Pontiff, who
is its President.

§2. It is to meet:

1° in Ordinary General Assembly, when matters are discussed which
pertain to the good of the universal Church;

2° in Extraordinary General Assembly, when the matters under
discussion, pertaining to the good of the universal Church, require
urgent consideration;

3° in Special Assembly, when matters are discussed which pertain
principally to one or more particular geographical areas.

§3. If he considers it opportune, especially for reasons of an
ecumenical nature, the Roman Pontiff may summon a synodal Assembly
according to other formats established by himself.

Art. 2

Members and other Participants in the Synod Assemblies

§1. The members of the Synod Assemblies are those listed in canon 346
of the Code of Canon Law.

§2. According to the theme and the circumstances, certain others who
are not Bishops may be summoned to the Synod Assembly; their role is
determined in each case by the Roman Pontiff.

§3. The designation of members and other participants for each Assembly
takes place according to the norms of particular law.

Art. 3

Sessions of the Synod Assembly

§1. According to the theme and the circumstances, the Synod Assembly
may be conducted in separate periods, held at different times, at the
discretion of the Roman Pontiff.

§2. During the time between periods, the General Secretariat of the
Synod of Bishops, together with the General Relator and the Special
Secretary of the Assembly, has the task of promoting further reflection
on the theme or on some aspects of particular importance that emerge
from the work of the Assembly.

§3. The members and other participants remain in office uninterruptedly
until the closure of the Synod Assembly.

Art. 4

Phases of the Synod Assembly

Each Synod Assembly unfolds in a series of phases: the preparatory
phase, the discussion phase and the implementation phase.

II. Preparatory Phase of the Synod Assembly

Art. 5

Start and Purpose of the Preparatory Phase

§1. The preparatory phase begins when the Roman Pontiff officially
opens the Synod Assembly, assigning one or more themes to it.

§2. Coordinated by the General Secretariat of the Synod, the
preparatory phase has at its purpose the consultation of the People of
God on the theme of the Synod Assembly.

Art. 6

Consultation of the People of God

§1. The consultation of the People of God takes place in the particular
Churches, through the Synods of Bishops of the Patriarchal Churches and
the Major Archbishoprics, the Councils of Hierarchs and the Assemblies
of Hierarchs of the Churches sui iuris and through the Episcopal
Conferences.

In each particular Church, the Bishops carry out the consultation of
the People of God by recourse to the participatory bodies provided for
by the law, without excluding other methods that they deem appropriate.

§2. The Unions, the Federations and the male and female Conferences of
Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life consult
the Major Superiors, who in their turn may approach their own Councils
and other members of the Institutes and Societies in question.

§3. In the same way, the Associations of the Faithful recognized by the
Holy See consult their own members.

§4. The dicasteries of the Roman Curia offer their contribution, taking
account of their respective particular areas of competence.

§5. The General Secretariat of the Synod may identify other forms of
consultation of the People of God.

Art. 7

Transmission of the Preparatory Contributions
to the General Secretariat of the Synod

§1. Each particular Church sends its own contribution to the Synod of
Bishops of the Patriarchal Churches and the Major Archbishoprics, or to
the Council of Hierarchs or the Assembly of Hierarchs of the Churches
sui iuris, or to the Episcopal Conference of its own territory.

The aforementioned bodies, in their turn, transmit a résumé of the
texts they receive to the General Secretariat of the Synod.

The Union of (male) Superiors General and the International Union of
(female) Superiors General do likewise with the contributions prepared
by the Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life.

The dicasteries of the Roman Curia transmit their contributions
directly to the General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops.

§2. The right of the faithful, individually or in association with
others, to submit their contributions directly to the General
Secretariat of the Synod, remains intact.

Art. 8

Convocation of a Pre-Synodal Meeting

§1. According to the theme and the circumstances, the General
Secretariat of the Synod may propose the convocation of a Pre-Synodal
Meeting, with the participation of some members of the faithful chosen
by the Secretariat, so that they too, in their diverse circumstances,
may offer their contribution to the Synod Assembly.

Certain others may also be invited.

§2. Such a Meeting may be held at regional level, involving the Synods
of Bishops of the Patriarchal Churches and Major Archbishoprics, the
Councils of Hierarchs and the Assemblies of Hierarchs of the Churches
sui iuris and the Episcopal Conferences of the territory concerned, as
well as the respective International Meetings of Episcopal Conferences,
so as to take account of the particular historical, cultural and
ecclesial features of the various geographical areas.

Art. 9

Involvement of Institutes of Higher Education

Institutes of Higher Education, especially those that possess special
competence with regard to the theme of the Synod Assembly or specific
questions related to it, may offer studies either on their own
initiative or at the request of the Synods of Bishops of the
Patriarchal Churches and Major Archbishoprics, of the Councils of
Hierarchs and Assemblies of Hierarchs of the Churches sui iuris and of
the Episcopal Conferences, or at the request of the General Secretariat
of the Synod.

These studies may always be transmitted to the General Secretariat of
the Synod.

Art. 10

Constitution of a Preparatory Commission

§1. For further exploration of the theme and for the redaction of any
documents that may be issued prior to the Synod Assembly, the General
Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops may avail itself of a Preparatory
Commission, made up of experts.

§2. This Commission is appointed by the General Secretary of the Synod,
who chairs it.

III. Discussion Phase of the Synod Assembly

Art. 11

President Delegate, Relator General and Special Secretary

Before the Synod Assembly begins, the Roman Pontiff appoints:

1° one or more Presidents-Delegate, who preside over the Assembly in
his name and with his authority;

2° a Relator General, who coordinates the discussion on the theme of
the Synod Assembly and the elaboration of any documents to be submitted
to the Assembly;

3° one or more Special Secretaries, who assist the Relator General in
all his activities.

Art. 12

Experts, Auditors, Fraternal Delegates and Special Guests

§1. The following may be invited to the Synod Assembly, without voting
rights:

1° Experts, who cooperate with the Special Secretary by virtue of their
competence on the theme of the Synod Assembly, to whom may be added
some Consultors of the General Secretariat;

2° Auditors, who contribute to the work of the Assembly by virtue of
their experience and knowledge.

3° Fraternal Delegates, who represent the Churches and the Ecclesial
Communities not yet in full communion with the Catholic Church.

§2. In particular circumstances certain Special Guests may be
designated, who are recognized as particular authorities on the theme
of the Synod Assembly, without enjoying voting rights.

Art. 13

Opening and Closing of the Synod Assembly

The Synod Assembly begins and ends with a Mass celebrated by the Roman
Pontiff, in which the members and the other participants in the
Assembly take part according to their various circumstances.

Art. 14

General Congregations and Meetings of Small Groups (circuli minores)

The Synod Assembly gathers in plenary sessions, called General
Congregations, in which the members, the Experts, the Auditors, the
Fraternal Delegates and the Special Guests take part, or else in
meetings of Small Groups, in which the participants in the Assembly are
grouped together according to the norms of particular law.

Art. 15

Discussion of the Theme of the Synod Assembly

§1. In the General Congregations the members make their interventions
according to particular law.

§2. Periodically, a free exchange of views takes place among the
members on the matters under discussion.

§3. The Auditors, Fraternal Delegates and Special Guests may also be
invited to speak on the theme of the Synod Assembly.

Art. 16

The Establishment of Study Commissions

According to the theme and the circumstances and respecting particular
law, some Study Commissions may be established, consisting of members
and other participants in the Synod Assembly.

Art. 17

Redaction and Approval of the Final Document

§1. The conclusions of the Assembly are brought together in a Final
Document.

§2. For the redaction of the Final Document, a special Commission is
set up, consisting of the Relator General, who chairs the Commission,
the General Secretary, the Special Secretary and some members elected
by the Synod Assembly taking due account of the various regions, as
well as others appointed by the Roman Pontiff.

§3. The Final Document is submitted for the approval of the members, in
accordance with particular law, with a view to obtaining moral
unanimity insofar as this is possible.

Art. 18

Delivery of the Final Document to the Roman Pontiff

§1. Once the approval of the members has been obtained, the Final
Document of the Assembly is presented to the Roman Pontiff, who decides
on its publication.

If it is expressly approved by the Roman Pontiff, the Final Document
participates in the ordinary Magisterium of the Successor of Peter.

§2. If the Roman Pontiff has granted deliberative power to the Synod
Assembly, according to the norm of canon 343 of the Code of Canon Law,
the Final Document participates in the ordinary Magisterium of the
Successor of Peter once it has been ratified and promulgated by him.

In this case, the Final Document is published with the signature of the
Roman Pontiff together with that of the members.

IV. Implementation Phase of the Synod Assembly

Art. 19

Reception and Implementation of the Conclusions of the Assembly

§1. The diocesan or eparchial Bishops see to the reception and
implementation of the conclusions of the Synod Assembly, once they have
been accepted by the Roman Pontiff, with the help of the participatory
bodies provided for by law.

§2. The Synods of Bishops of the Patriarchal Churches and Major
Archbishoprics, the Councils of Hierarchs and the Assemblies of
Hierarchs of the Churches sui iuris and the Episcopal Conferences
coordinate the implementation of the aforementioned conclusions in
their territory, and to this end they may set up common initiatives.

Art. 20

Duties of the General Secretariat of the Synod

§1. Together with the competent dicastery of the Roman Curia, as well
as other dicasteries interested in various ways according to the theme
and the circumstances, the General Secretariat of the Synod for its
part promotes the implementation of the synodal recommendations
approved by the Roman Pontiff.

§2. The General Secretariat may commission studies and other suitable
initiatives for this purpose.

§3. In particular circumstances, the General Secretariat, by mandate of
the Roman Pontiff, may issue documents regarding implementation, having
heard the view of the competent dicastery.

Art. 21

The Establishment of a Commission for Implementation

§1. According to the theme and the circumstances, the General
Secretariat of the Synod may have recourse to a Commission for
implementation, consisting of experts.

§2. The General Secretary of the Synod appoints its members, having
heard the Head of the competent dicastery of the Roman Curia, and
chairs it.

§3. The Commission assists the General Secretariat in fulfilling the
task outlined in art. 20 §1 by means of dedicated studies.

V. General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops

Art. 22

Constitution of the General Secretariat

§1. The General Secretariat is a permanent institution at the service
of the Synod of Bishops, directly subject to the Roman Pontiff.

§2. It consists of the General Secretary, the Undersecretary, who
assists the General Secretary in all his activities, the Ordinary
Council, and also, if they have been established, the Councils
mentioned in art. 25.

§3. The General Secretary and the Undersecretary are appointed by the
Roman Pontiff and are members of the Synod Assembly.

§4. The General Secretariat avails itself of an appropriate number of
officials and consultors for the performance of its duties.

Art. 23

Duties of the General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops

§1. The General Secretariat is has competence for the preparation and
implementation of the Synod Assemblies, and also for other questions
that the Roman Pontiff may wish to put before it for the good of the
universal Church.

§2. To this end, it cooperates with the Synods of Bishops of the
Patriarchal Churches and Major Archbishoprics, the Councils of
Hierarchs and the Assemblies of Hierarchs of the Churches sui iuris and
the Episcopal Conferences, as well as the dicasteries of the Roman
Curia.

Art. 24

The Ordinary Council of the General Secretariat

§1. The Ordinary Council of the General Secretariat is competent for
the preparation and implementation of the Ordinary General Assembly.

§2. It consists for the most part of diocesan Bishops, elected by the
Ordinary General Assembly to represent the different geographical areas
according to the norm of particular law, among whom is one of the Heads
or Eparchial Bishops of the Eastern Catholic Churches; it also includes
the Head of the dicastery of the Roman Curia that has competence for
the theme of the Synod established by the Roman Pontiff as well as
certain Bishops appointed by the Roman Pontiff.

§3. The members of the Ordinary Council take up office at the
conclusion of the Ordinary General Assembly that elects them, they are
members of the following Ordinary General Assembly and their mandate
ceases at the conclusion of the latter.

Art. 25

The Other Councils of the General Secretariat

§1. The Councils of the General Secretariat for the preparation of the
Extraordinary General Assembly and of the Special Assembly consist of
members appointed by the Roman Pontiff.

§2. The members of these Councils take part in the Synod Assembly
according to particular law and their mandate ceases at the conclusion
of the latter.

§3. The Councils of the General Secretariat for the implementation of
the Extraordinary General Assembly and the Special Assembly consist
largely of members elected by the Synod Assembly according to the norm
of particular law, but with the addition of further members appointed
by the Roman Pontiff.

§4. Such Councils remain in office for five years from the closure of
the Synod Assembly, unless the Roman Pontiff disposes otherwise.

Final Provisions

Art. 26

In accordance with the spirit and the norms of the present Apostolic
Constitution, the General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops will
issue an Instruction on the conduct of the Synodal Assemblies and on
the activity of the General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops, and
regulations for each Synod Assembly.

Art. 27

In the spirit of canon 20 of the Code of Canon Law and canon 1502 §2 of
the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, upon promulgation and
publication of the present Apostolic Constitution, all contrary
provisions are duly abrogated, especially the following:

1. those canons of the Code of Canon Law and the Code of Canons of the
Eastern Churches that, in whole or in part, directly contradict any
article of the present Apostolic Constitution;

2. the articles of the Motu Proprio [75]Apostolica Sollicitudo of
[76]Paul VI of 15 September 1965;

3. The [77]Ordo Synodi Episcoporum of 29 September 2006, including the
Adnexum de modo procedendi in Circulis minoribus.

I establish that what has been set forth in this Apostolic Constitution
is fully effective from the day of its publication in L'Osservatore
Romano, anything to the contrary notwithstanding, even if worthy of
special mention, and that it be published in the official Commentary
Acta Apostolicae Sedis.

I invite everyone to receive the provisions of this Apostolic
Constitution readily and wholeheartedly, through the help of the Virgin
Mary, Queen of Apostles and Mother of the Church.

Given in Rome, at Saint Peter's, on 15 September 2018, the sixth year
of my Pontificate.


Franciscus
_______________________

[78][1] Cf. Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, Decree on the Pastoral
Office of Bishops [79]Christus Dominus (28 October 1965), 5.

[80][2] [81]Ibid.; cf. Saint [82]John Paul II, Post-Synodal Apostolic
Exhortation [83]Pastores Gregis (16 October 2003), 58.

[84][3] Apostolic Exhortation [85]Evangelii Gaudium (24 November 2013),
1.

[86][4] [87]Ibid., 25.

[88][5] [89]Ibid., 27.

[90][6] Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, Decree on the Missionary
Activity of the Church [91]Ad Gentes (7 October 1965), 29; cf. ID.,
Dogmatic Constitution on the Church [92]Lumen Gentium (21 November
1964), 23.

[93][7] [94]Lumen Gentium, 18.

[95][8] Cf. [96]ibid., 21-22; [97]Christus Dominus, 4.

[98][9] Cf. [99]Lumen Gentium, 23; [100]Christus Dominus, 3.

[101][10] Cf. [102]Lumen Gentium, 22; [103]Christus Dominus, 4; Codex
Iuris Canonici (25 January 1983), can. 337, §§1-2; [104]Codex Canonum
Ecclesiarum Orientalium (18 October 1990), can. 50, §§1-2.

[105][11] Cf. Codex Iuris Canonici, can. 337, §3; [106]Codex Canonum
Ecclesiarum Orientalium, can. 50, §3.

[107][12] No. I.

[108][13] Cf. ibid., II.

[109][14] Ibid., Preamble.

[110][15] Cf. Codex Iuris Canonici, can. 342-348; [111]Codex Canonum
Ecclesiarum Orientalium, can. 46.

[112][16] [113]Homily at the Mass for the Closing of the VI Ordinary
General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops (29 October 1983).

[114][17] [115]Address to Members of the XIII Ordinary Council of the
General Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops (13 June 2013).

[116][18] [117]Lumen Gentium, 25.

[118][19] Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation [119]Pastores Gregis, 28.

[120][20] Apostolic Exhortation [121]Evangelii Gaudium, 119.

[122][21] [123]Lumen Gentium, 12.

[124][22] [125]Address to the Participants in the Symposium for New
Bishops promoted by the Congregation for Bishops and by the
Congregation for Eastern Churches (19 September 2013). Cf.
[126]Evangelii Gaudium, 31.

[127][23] [128]Address at the Vigil of Prayer in preparation for the
Synod on the Family (4 October 2014).

[129][24] [130]Address on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Synod of
Bishops (17 October 2015).

[131][25] [132]Ibid.

[133][26] Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation [134]Pastores Gregis, 58.

[135][27] [136]Address on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Synod of
Bishops. Cf. [137]Evangelii Gaudium, 31.

[138][28] [139]Address on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Synod of
Bishops.

[140][29] Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation [141]Pastores Gregis, 58.

[142][30] [143]John Paul II, [144]Address to the Council of the General
Secretariat of the Synod of Bishops (30 April 1983).

[145][31] [146]Closing Address of the XIV Ordinary General Assembly of
the Synod of Bishops (24 October 2015).

[147][32] [148]Paul VI, [149]Address for the start of the sessions of
the I Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops (30 September
1967).

[150][33] Cf. Codex Iuris Canonici, can. 339, §2; [151]Codex Canonum
Ecclesiarum Orientalium, can. 52, §2.

[152][34] Cf. Codex Iuris Canonici, can. 346.

[153][35] [154]Address on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Synod of
Bishops.

[155][36] Cf. [156]Lumen Gentium, 22.

[157][37] [158]Ibid.

[159][38] Codex Iuris Canonici, can. 333, §2; cf. [160]Codex Canonum
Ecclesiarum Orientalium, can. 45, §2; [161]Pastores Gregis, 58.

[162][39] [163]Letter to the General Secretary of the Synod of Bishops
on the occasion of the elevation of the Undersecretary to the episcopal
dignity (1 April 2014).

[164][40] [165]Evangelii Gaudium, 32.

[166][41] Encyclical Letter [167]Ut Unum Sint (25 May 1995), 95.
__________________________________________________________________

© Copyright - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

References

1. http://w2.vatican.va/content/vatican/en.html
2. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
3. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
4. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
5. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
6. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.rss.xml
7. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
8. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
9. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
10. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.pdf
11. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
12. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions.index.html#apost_constitutions
13. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/de/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
14. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
15. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/es/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
16. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/fr/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
17. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/it/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
18. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/pl/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
19. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/pt/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html
20. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
21. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/index.htm
22. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn1
23. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn2
24. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn3
25. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn4
26. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn5
27. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn6
28. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/index.htm
29. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/i-vatican-council/index.htm
30. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn7
31. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn8
32. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn9
33. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn10
34. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn11
35. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/la/speeches/1965/documents/hf_p-vi_spe_19650914_concilio-iv-sessione.html
36. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
37. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en/motu_proprio/documents/hf_p-vi_motu-proprio_19650915_apostolica-sollicitudo.html
38. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
39. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn12
40. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn13
41. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
42. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn14
43. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn15
44. http://w2.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en.html
45. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
46. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn16
47. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn17
48. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/index.htm
49. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn18
50. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn19
51. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn20
52. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn21
53. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn22
54. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn23
55. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn24
56. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn25
57. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
58. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn26
59. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn27
60. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn28
61. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn29
62. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn30
63. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn31
64. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn32
65. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn33
66. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn34
67. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn35
68. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn36
69. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn37
70. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn38
71. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn39
72. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn40
73. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
74. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_edn41
75. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en/motu_proprio/documents/hf_p-vi_motu-proprio_19650915_apostolica-sollicitudo.html
76. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
77. http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/synod/documents/rc_synod_20050309_documentation-profile_en.html
78. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref1
79. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_decree_19651028_christus-dominus_en.html
80. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref2
81. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_decree_19651028_christus-dominus_en.html
82. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
83. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/apost_exhortations/documents/hf_jp-ii_exh_20031016_pastores-gregis.html
84. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref3
85. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#The_joy_of_the_gospel
86. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref4
87. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#II.%E2%80%82Pastoral_activity_and_conversion
88. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref5
89. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#II.%E2%80%82Pastoral_activity_and_conversion
90. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref6
91. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_decree_19651207_ad-gentes_en.html
92. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
93. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref7
94. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
95. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref8
96. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
97. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_decree_19651028_christus-dominus_en.html
98. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref9
99. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
100. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_decree_19651028_christus-dominus_en.html
101. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref10
102. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
103. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_decree_19651028_christus-dominus_en.html
104. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/la/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-ii_apc_19901018_codex-can-eccl-orient-1.html#TITULUS_III
105. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref11
106. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/la/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-ii_apc_19901018_codex-can-eccl-orient-1.html#TITULUS_III
107. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref12
108. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref13
109. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref14
110. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref15
111. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/la/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-ii_apc_19901018_codex-can-eccl-orient-1.html#TITULUS_III
112. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref16
113. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/la/homilies/1983/documents/hf_jp-ii_hom_19831029_chiusura-sinodo.html
114. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref17
115. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2013/june/documents/papa-francesco_20130613_xiii-consiglio-sinodo-vescovi.html
116. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref18
117. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
118. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref19
119. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/apost_exhortations/documents/hf_jp-ii_exh_20031016_pastores-gregis.html
120. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref20
121. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#We_are_all_missionary_disciples
122. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref21
123. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
124. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref22
125. https://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2013/september/documents/papa-francesco_20130919_convegno-nuovi-vescovi.html
126. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/it/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#Un_improrogabile_rinnovamento_ecclesiale
127. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref23
128. https://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2014/october/documents/papa-francesco_20141004_incontro-per-la-famiglia.html
129. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref24
130. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2015/october/documents/papa-francesco_20151017_50-anniversario-sinodo.html
131. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref25
132. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2015/october/documents/papa-francesco_20151017_50-anniversario-sinodo.html
133. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref26
134. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/apost_exhortations/documents/hf_jp-ii_exh_20031016_pastores-gregis.html
135. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref27
136. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2015/october/documents/papa-francesco_20151017_50-anniversario-sinodo.html
137. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#An_ecclesial_renewal_which_cannot_be_deferred
138. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref28
139. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2015/october/documents/papa-francesco_20151017_50-anniversario-sinodo.html
140. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref29
141. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/apost_exhortations/documents/hf_jp-ii_exh_20031016_pastores-gregis.html
142. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref30
143. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
144. https://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/speeches/1983/april/documents/hf_jp-ii_spe_19830430_sinodo-vescovi.html
145. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref31
146. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2015/october/documents/papa-francesco_20151024_sinodo-conclusione-lavori.html
147. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref32
148. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
149. http://w2.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/la/speeches/1967/september/documents/hf_p-vi_spe_19670930_inizio-lavori-sinodo.html
150. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref33
151. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/la/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-ii_apc_19901018_codex-can-eccl-orient-1.html#TITULUS_III
152. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref34
153. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref35
154. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2015/october/documents/papa-francesco_20151017_50-anniversario-sinodo.html
155. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref36
156. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
157. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref37
158. http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
159. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref38
160. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/la/apost_constitutions/documents/hf_jp-ii_apc_19901018_codex-can-eccl-orient-1.html#TITULUS_III
161. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/apost_exhortations/documents/hf_jp-ii_exh_20031016_pastores-gregis.html
162. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref39
163. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/letters/2014/documents/papa-francesco_20140401_cardinale-baldisseri.html
164. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref40
165. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_exhortations/documents/papa-francesco_esortazione-ap_20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html#An_ecclesial_renewal_which_cannot_be_deferred
166. http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apost_constitutions/documents/papa-francesco_costituzione-ap_20180915_episcopalis-communio.html#_ednref41
167. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_jp-ii_enc_25051995_ut-unum-sint.html
