____________________

[8]Gaudete in Domino - On Christian Joy, by Pope Paul VI, 9 May 1975

[9]official portrait of Pope Paul VI To the Episcopate, to the Clergy,
and to all the Faithful of the entire world. Venerable brothers and
dear sons and daughters: health and the Apostolic Blessing.

Rejoice in the Lord always; the Lord is near to all who call upon Him
in truth!

Dear brothers and sons and daughters in Christ, many times already in
the course of this Holy Year we have exhorted the People of God to
correspond with joyful enthusiasm to the grace of the Jubilee. As you
know, our invitation is essentially an appeal to interior renewal and
reconciliation in Christ. It is a question of people's salvation, of
their complete happiness. In this time, when throughout the world
believers are preparing to celebrate the coming of the Holy Spirit, we
invite you to implore from Him the gift of joy.

On our own part indeed, the ministry of reconciliation is being
exercised in the midst of many contradictions and difficulties, but it
is sustained and accompanied in us by the joy of the Holy Spirit.
Likewise we are truly able to adopt as our own and address to the
universal Church the confidence of the Apostle Paul in his community at
Corinth: "...you are in our hearts, to die together and to live
together. I have great confidence in you...I am filled with comfort.
With all our affliction, I am overjoyed." Yes, it is for us, too, an
exigence of love to invite you to share this abounding joy which is a
gift of the Holy Spirit.

We have therefore felt it as a happy interior need to address to you in
the course of this year of grace, and very fittingly on the occasion of
Pentecost, an Apostolic Exhortation whose theme is precisely: Christian
joy - joy in the Holy Spirit. It is a sort of hymn to the divine joy
that we would like to utter, so that it may awaken an echo in the whole
world, and first of all in the Church: may joy be poured out in hearts
together with the love of which it is the fruit, by the Holy Spirit
that has been given to us. Thus we wish that your voice may be joined
with ours, for the spiritual consolation of the Church of God and of
all those who are willing to lend their hearts and minds to this
celebration.

Christian joy could not be properly praised if one were to remain
indifferent to the outward and inward witness that God the Creator
renders to Himself in the midst of His creation: "And God saw that it
was good." Raising up man in the setting of a universe that is the work
of His power, wisdom and love, and even before manifesting Himself
personally according to the mode of revelation, God disposes the mind
and heart of His creature to meet joy, at the same time as truth. One
should therefore be attentive to the appeal that rises from man's
heart, from the age of wondering childhood to serene old age, as a
presentiment of the divine mystery.

When he awakens to the world, does not man feel, in addition to the
natural desire to understand and take possession of it, the desire to
find within it his fulfillment and happiness? As everyone knows, there
are several degrees of this "happiness." Its most noble expression is
joy, or "happiness" in the strict sense, when man, on the level of his
higher faculties, finds his peace and satisfaction in the possession of
a known and loved good. Thus, man experiences joy when he finds himself
in harmony with nature, and especially in the encounter, sharing and
communion with other people. All the more does he know spiritual joy or
happiness when his spirit enters into possession of God, known and
loved as the supreme and immutable good. Poets, artists, thinkers, but
also ordinary men and women, simply disposed to a certain inner light
have been able and still are able, in the times before Christ and in
our own time and among us, to experience something of the joy of God.

But how can we ignore the additional fact that joy is always imperfect,
fragile and threatened? By a strange paradox, the consciousness of that
which, beyond all passing pleasures, would constitute true happiness,
also includes the certainty that there is no perfect happiness. The
experience of finiteness, felt by each generation in its turn, obliges
one to acknowledge and to plumb the immense gap that always exists
between reality and the desire for the infinite.

This paradox, and this difficulty in attaining joy, seem to us
particularly acute today. This is the reason for our message.
Technological society has succeeded in multiplying the opportunities
for pleasure, but it has great difficulty in generating joy. For joy
comes from another source. It is spiritual. Money, comfort, hygiene and
material security are often not lacking; and yet boredom, depression
and sadness unhappily remain the lot of many. These feelings sometimes
go as far as anguish and despair, which apparent carefreeness, the
frenzies of present good fortune an(l artificial paradises cannot
assuage. Do people perhaps feel helpless to dominate industrial
progress, to plan society in a human way? Does the future perhaps seem
too uncertain, human life too threatened? Or is it not perhaps a matter
of loneliness, of an unsatisfied thirst for love and for someone's
presence, of an ill-defined emptiness? On the contrary, in many regions
and sometimes in our midst, the sum of physical and moral sufferings
weighs heavily: so many starving people, so many victims of fruitless
combats, so many people torn from their homes! These miseries are
perhaps not deeper than those of the past; but they have taken on a
worldwide dimension. They are better known, reported by the mass media
- at least as much as the events of good fortune - and they overwhelm
people's minds. Often there seems to be no adequate human solution to
them.

This situation nevertheless cannot hinder us from speaking about joy
and hoping for joy. It is indeed in the midst of their distress that
our fellow men need to know joy, to hear its song. We sympathize
profoundly with those over whom poverty and sufferings of every sort
cast a veil of sadness. We are thinking in particular of those who are
without means, without help, without friendship - those who see their
human hopes annihilated. More than ever they are present in our prayers
and our affection. We do not wish to overwhelm anyone. On the contrary,
we are looking for the remedies capable of bringing light. In our view,
these remedies fall into three categories.

People must obviously unite their efforts to secure at least a minimum
of relief, well-being, security and justice, necessary for happiness,
for the many peoples deprived of them. Such solidarity is already the
work of God; it corresponds to Christ's commandment. Already it secures
peace, restores hope, strength, communion, and gives access to joy, for
the one who gives as for the one who receives, for it is more blessed
to give than to receive. Dear Brothers and sons and daughters, how many
times do we urge you to prepare a world, one more suitable for living
in, to bring about without delay justice and charity for the integral
development of all! The conciliar Constitution "Gaudium et spes" and
numerous pontifical documents have indeed insisted on this point. Even
though this is not the theme that we are directly touching upon here,
effort should be made not to forget this fundamental duty of love of
neighbor, without which it would be unbecoming to speak of joy.

There is also needed a patient effort to teach people, or teach them
once more, how to savor in a simple way the many human joys that the
Creator places in our path: the elating joy of existence and of life;
the joy of chaste and sanctified love; the peaceful joy of nature and
silence; the sometimes austere joy of work well done; the joy and
satisfaction of duty performed; the transparent joy of purity, service
and sharing; the demanding joy of sacrifice. The Christian will be able
to purify, complete and sublimate these joys; he will not be able to
disdain them. Christian joy presupposes a person capable of natural
joy. These natural joys were often used by Christ as a starting point
when He proclaimed the kingdom of God.

But the theme of our exhortation is situated on still another level.
For the problem seems to be, above all, of the spiritual order. It is
man - in his soul - who finds himself without the means to take on
himself the sufferings and miseries of our time. These sufferings and
miseries crush him all the more to the extent that the meaning of life
escapes him, that he is no longer sure of himself or of his
transcendent calling and destiny. He has desacralized the universe and
now he is desacralizing humanity; he has at times cut the vital link
that joined him to God. Hope, and the value of individuals, are no
longer sufficiently ensured. God seems to him abstract and useless.
Without his being able to express it, God's silence weighs heavily on
him. Yes, cold and darkness are first in the heart of the man who knows
sadness. One can speak here of the sadness of non-believers, when the
human spirit, created in the image and likeness of God, and therefore
instinctively oriented towards Him as its sole and supreme good,
remains without knowing Him clearly, without loving Him, and therefore
without experiencing the happiness, even though imperfect, that is
brought by the knowledge of God and by the certainty of having a link
with Him that even death cannot break. Who does not recall the words of
Saint Augustine: "You have made us for Yourself. Lord, and our hearts
are restless until they rest in You"? It is therefore by becoming more
present to God, by turning away from sin, that man can truly enter into
spiritual joy. Without doubt "flesh and blood" are incapable of this.
But Revelation can open up this possibility and grace can bring about
this return. Our intention is precisely to invite you to the sources of
Christian joy. And how could we do this, without ourselves becoming
attentive to God's plan, listening to the Good News of His love?

In essence, Christian joy is the spiritual sharing in the unfathomable
joy, both divine and human, which is in the heart of Jesus Christ
glorified. As soon as God the Father begins to manifest in history the
mystery of His will according to His purpose which He set forth in
Christ as a plan for the fullness of time, this joy is mysteriously
announced in the midst of the People of God, before its identity has
been unveiled.

Thus Abraham, our father, who was set apart for the future
accomplishment of the Promise, and who hoped against all hope, receives
when his son Isaac is born the prophetic first fruits of this joy. This
joy becomes transfigured through a trial touching death, when this only
son is restored to him alive, a prefiguring of the resurrection of the
one who was to come: the only Son of God promised for the redeeming
sacrifice. Abraham rejoiced at the thought of seeing the Day of Christ,
the Day of Salvation: he "saw it and was glad."

The joy of salvation then increases and is transmitted throughout the
prophetic history of ancient Israel. It persists and is unfailingly
reborn in the course of tragic trials due to the culpable infidelities
of the chosen people and to the external persecutions which try to
detach them from their God. This joy, ever threatened and springing up
again, is proper to the people born of Abraham.

It is always a question of an uplifting experience of liberation and
restoration (at least foretold), having its origin in the merciful love
of God for His beloved people, on whose behalf He accomplishes, by pure
grace and miraculous power, the promises of the Covenant. Such is the
joy of the Mosaic Passover, which happened as the prefiguring of the
eschatological liberation which would be wrought by Jesus Christ in the
paschal context of the new and eternal Covenant. It is a question also
of the real joy repeatedly hymned by the Psalms - the joy of living
with God and for God. It is a question finally and above all of the
glorious and supernatural joy, prophesied for the new Jerusalem
redeemed from the exile and loved with a mystical love by God Himself.

The ultimate meaning of this unheard-of outpouring of redemptive love
will only appear at the time of the new Pasch and new Exodus. At that
time the People of God will be led, in the death and resurrection of
the Suffering Servant, from this world to the Father, from the
figurative Jerusalem of here below to the Jerusalem above: "Whereas you
have been forsaken and hated, with no one passing through, I will make
you majestic for ever, a joy from age to age.... For as a young man
marries a virgin, so shall your sons marry you, and as the bridegroom
rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you."

Through the course of many centuries and in the midst of most terrible
trials, these promises wonderfully sustained the mystical hope of
ancient Israel. And it is ancient Israel that transmitted them to the
Church of Jesus Christ, in such a way that we are indebted to ancient
Israel for some of the purest expressions of our hymn of joy. And yet,
according to faith and the Christian experience of the Holy Spirit,
this peace which is given by God and which spreads out like an
overflowing torrent when the time of "consolation" comes, is linked to
the coming and presence of Christ.

No one is excluded from the joy brought by the Lord. The great joy
announced by the angel on Christmas night is truly for all the people,
both for the people of Israel then anxiously awaiting a Savior, and for
the numberless people made up of all those who, in time to come, would
receive its message and strive to live by it. The Blessed Virgin Mary
was the first to have received its announcement, from the angel
Gabriel, and her Magnificat was already the exultant hymn of all the
humble. Whenever we say the rosary, the joyful mysteries thus place us
once more before the inexpressible event which is the center and summit
of history: the coming on earth of Emmanuel, God with us. John the
Baptist, whose mission is to point Him out to the expectation of
Israel, had himself leapt for joy, in His presence, in the womb of his
mother. When Jesus begins His ministry, John "rejoices greatly at the
bridegroom's voice."

Let us now pause to contemplate the person of Jesus during His earthly
life. In His humanity He had experienced our joys. He has manifestly
known, appreciated, and celebrated a whole range of human joys, those
simple daily joys within the reach of everyone. The depth of His
interior life did not blunt His concrete attitude or His sensitivity.
He admires the birds of heaven, the lilies of the field. He immediately
grasps God's attitude towards creation at the dawn of history. He
willingly extols the joy of the sower and the harvester, the joy of the
man who finds a hidden treasure, the joy of the shepherd who recovers
his sheep or of the woman who finds her lost coin, the joy of those
invited to the feast, the joy of a marriage celebration, the joy of the
father who embraces his son returning from a prodigal life, and the joy
of the woman who has just brought her child into the world. For Jesus,
these joys are real because for Him they are the signs of the spiritual
joys of the kingdom of God: the joy of people who enter this kingdom,
return there or work there, the joy of the Father who welcomes them.
And for His part Jesus Himself manifests His satisfaction and His
tenderness when He meets children wishing to approach Him, a rich young
man who is faithful and wants to do more, friends who open their home
to Him, like Martha, Mary and Lazarus. His happiness is above all to
see the Word accepted, the possessed delivered, a sinful woman or a
publican like Zacchaeus converted, a widow taking from her poverty and
giving. He even exults with joy when He states that the little ones
have the revelation of the kingdom which remains hidden from the wise
and able. Yes, because Christ was "a man like us in all things but
sin," He accepted and experienced affective and spiritual joys, as a
gift of God. And He did not rest until "to the poor he proclaimed the
good news of salvation...and to those in sorrow, joy." The Gospel of
Saint Luke particularly gives witness to this seed of joy. The miracles
of Jesus and His words of pardon are so many signs of divine goodness:
all the people rejoiced at all the glorious things that were done by
Him, and gave glory to God. For the Christian as for Jesus, it is a
question of living, in thanksgiving to the Father, the human joys that
the Creator gives him.

But it is necessary here below to understand properly the secret of the
unfathomable joy which dwells in Jesus and which is special to Him. It
is especially the Gospel of Saint John that lifts the veil, by giving
us the intimate words of the Son of God made man. If Jesus radiates
such peace, such assurance, such happiness, such availability, it is by
reason of the inexpressible love by which He knows that He is loved by
His Father. When He is baptized on the banks of the Jordan, this love,
which is present from the first moment of His Incarnation, is
manifested: "You are my Son, the Beloved; my favor rests on you." This
certitude is inseparable from the consciousness of Jesus. It is a
presence which never leaves Him all alone. It is an intimate knowledge
which fills Him: "...the Father knows me and I know the Father." It is
an unceasing and total exchange: "All I have is yours and all you have
is mine." The Father has given the Son the power to judge, the power to
dispose of life. It is a mutual indwelling: "...I am in the Father and
the Father in me...." In return, the Son gives the Father immeasurable
love: "...I love the Father.... I am doing exactly what the Father told
me." He always does what is pleasing to His Father: it is His food and
drink. His availability goes even to the gift of His human life; His
confidence goes even to the certitude of taking it up again: "The
Father loves me because I lay down my life in order to take it up
again." In this sense He rejoices to go to the Father. For Jesus it is
not a question of a passing awareness. It is the reverberation in His
human consciousness of the love that He has always known as God in the
bosom of the Father: "...you loved me before the foundation of the
world." Here there is an incommunicable relationship of love which is
identified with His existence as the Son and which is the secret of the
life of the Trinity: the Father is seen here as the one who gives
Himself to the Son, without reserve and without ceasing, in a burst of
joyful generosity, and the Son is seen as He who gives Himself in the
same way to the Father, in a burst of joyful gratitude, in the Holy
Spirit.

And the disciples and all those who believe in Christ are called to
share this joy. Jesus wishes them to have in themselves His joy in its
fullness. "I have made your name known to them and will continue to
make it known, so that the love with which you loved me may be in them,
and so that I may be in them."

This joy of living in God's love begins here below. It is the joy of
the kingdom of God. But it is granted on a steep road which requires a
total confidence in the Father and in the Son, and a preference given
to the kingdom. The message of Jesus promises above all joy - this
demanding joy; and does it not begin with the [10]beatitudes?

"How happy are you who are poor: yours is the kingdom of God. Happy you
who are hungry now: you shall be satisfied. Happy you who weep now: you
shall laugh."

In a mysterious way, Christ Himself accepts death at the hands of the
wicked and death on the cross, in order to eradicate from man's heart
the sins of self-sufficiency and to manifest to the Father a complete
filial obedience. But the Father has not allowed death to keep Him in
its power. The resurrection of Jesus is the seal placed by the Father
on the value of His Son's sacrifice: it is the proof of the Father's
fidelity, according to the desire expressed by Jesus before He enters
into His passion: "Father...glorify your Son so that your Son may
glorify you." Henceforth, Jesus is living forever in the glory of the
Father, and this is why the disciples were confirmed in an ineradicable
joy when they saw the Lord on Easter evening.

It remains that, here below, the joy of the kingdom brought to
realization can only spring from the simultaneous celebration of the
death and resurrection of the Lord. This is the paradox of the
Christian condition which sheds particular light on that of the human
condition: neither trials nor sufferings have been eliminated from this
world, but they take on a new meaning in the certainty of sharing in
the redemption wrought by the Lord and of sharing in His glory. This is
why the Christian, though subject to the difficulties of human life, is
not reduced to groping for the way; nor does he see in death the end of
his hopes. As in fact the prophet foretold: "The people that walked in
darkness has seen a great light; on those who live in a land of deep
shadow a light has shone. You have made their gladness greater, you
have made their joy increase...." The Easter Exultet sings of a mystery
accomplished beyond the hopes of the prophets: in the joyful
announcement of the resurrection, even man's suffering finds itself
transformed, while the fullness of joy springs from the victory of the
Crucified, from His pierced heart and His glorified body. This victory
enlightens the darkness of souls: Et nox illuminatio mea in deliciis
meis.

Paschal joy is not just that of a possible transfiguration: it is the
joy of the new presence of the Risen Christ dispensing to His own the
Holy Spirit, so that He may dwell with them. The Holy Spirit is given
to the Church as the inexhaustible principle of her joy as the bride of
the glorified Christ. He recalls to her mind, through the ministry of
grace and truth exercised by the successors of the apostles, the very
teaching of the Lord. The Holy Spirit stirs up in the Church divine
life and the apostolate. And the Christian knows that this Spirit will
never be quenched in the course of history. The source of hope
manifested at Pentecost will never be exhausted.

Thus the Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and the Son and is their
living mutual love, is henceforth communicated to the People of the New
Covenant, and to each soul ready for His secret action. He makes us His
dwelling place: dulcis hospes animae. Together with Him, man's heart is
inhabited by the Father and the Son. The Holy Spirit raises up therein
a filial prayer that springs forth from the depths of the soul and is
expressed in praise, thanksgiving, reparation and supplication. Then we
can experience joy which is properly spiritual, the joy which is a
fruit of the Holy Spirit. It consists in the human spirit's finding
repose and a deep satisfaction in the possession of the Triune God,
known by faith and loved with the charity that comes from Him. Such a
joy henceforth characterizes all the Christian virtues. The humble
human joys in our lives, which are like seeds of a higher reality, are
transfigured. Here below this joy will always include to a certain
extent the painful trial of a woman in travail and a certain apparent
abandonment, like that of the orphan: tears and lamentation, while the
world parades its gloating satisfaction. But the disciples' sadness,
which is according to God and not according to the world, will be
promptly changed into a spiritual joy that no one will be able to take
away from them.

Such is the situation of Christian existence, and very particularly of
the apostolic life. This life, being animated by a zealous love of the
Lord and His brethren, is necessarily exercised under the standard of
the paschal sacrifice, going through love to death, and through death
to life and love. Hence the condition of the Christian, and above all
of the apostle, who must become the "model of the flock" and associate
himself freely with the Redeemer's passion. The apostolic life thus
corresponds to what was described in the Gospel as the law of Christian
blessedness, in continuity with the destiny of the prophets: "Happy are
you when people abuse you and persecute you and speak all kinds of
calumny against you on my account. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward
will be great in heaven; this is how they persecuted the prophets
before you."

Unfortunately, in our century which is so threatened by the illusion of
false happiness, we do not lack opportunities of noting the psychic
inability of man to accept "the gifts of the Spirit of God, for they
are folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they
are spiritually discerned." The world - that world which is unfitted to
receive the Spirit of Truth, whom it neither sees nor knows - only sees
one side of things. It considers only the affliction and poverty of the
disciple, while the latter always remains, in his inmost being, in joy,
because he is in communion with the Father and with His Son Jesus
Christ.

Dear Brothers and sons and daughters, such is the joyful hope drawn
from the very sources of God's Word. For twenty centuries, this source
of joy has not ceased to spring up in the Church, and especially in the
hearts of the saints. We must now recall some echoes of this spiritual
experience; according to the diversity of charisms and particular
vocations, it illustrates the mystery of Christian joy.

In the first rank is the Virgin Mary, full of grace, the Mother of the
Savior. She, accepting the announcement from on high, the Servant of
the Lord, Spouse of the Spirit and Mother of the Eternal Son, manifests
her joy before her cousin Elizabeth who celebrates her faith: "My soul
magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my
Savior...henceforth all generations will call me blessed." She has
grasped, better than all other creatures, that God accomplishes
wonderful things: His name is holy, He shows His mercy, He raises up
the humble, He is faithful to His promises. Not that the apparent
course of her life in any way departs from the ordinary, but she
meditates on the least signs of God, pondering them in her heart. Not
that she is in any way spared sufferings: she stands, the mother of
sorrows, at the foot of the cross, associated in an eminent way with
the sacrifice of the innocent Servant. But she is also open in an
unlimited degree to the joy of the resurrection; and she is also taken
up, body and soul, into the glory of heaven. The first of the redeemed,
immaculate from the moment of her conception, the incomparable
dwelling-place of the Spirit, the pure abode of the Redeemer of
mankind, she is at the same time the beloved Daughter of God and, in
Christ, the Mother of all. She is the perfect model of the Church both
on earth and in glory. What a marvelous echo the prophetic words about
the new Jerusalem find in her wonderful existence as the Virgin of
Israel: "I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall exult in my
God; for he has clothed me with the garment of salvation, he has
covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decks
himself with a garland and as a bride adorns herself with her jewels."
With Christ, she sums up in herself all joys; she lives the perfect joy
promised to the Church: Mater plena sanctae laetitiae. And it is with
good reason that her children on earth, turning to her who is the
mother of hope and of grace, invoke her as the cause of their joy:
Causa nostrae laetitiae.

After Mary, we find the expression of the purest and most burning joy -
where the cross of Jesus is embraced with the most faithful love -
among the martyrs, in whom, in the very midst of their torment, the
Holy Spirit inspires an impassioned longing for the coming of the
Spouse. Dying and seeing heaven open, Saint Stephen is but the first of
the innumerable witnesses of Christ. How many there are, in our day
still and in many countries, who, risking everything for Christ, could
declare with the martyr Ignatius of Antioch: "It is in the fullness of
life that I write to you, desiring to die. My earthly desire has been
crucified, and there is no more fire in me to love matter. There is
only in me a living water that murmurs and says: `Come to the Father.'"

In the same way the strength of the Church, the certainty of her
victory and her happiness in the celebration of the martyrs' combat
come from the fact that she contemplates in them the glorious
fruitfulness of the cross. This is the reason why our predecessor Saint
Leo the Great, extolling from this Roman See the martyrdom of the holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, exclaims: "Precious in the eyes of God is the
death of His saints, and no form of cruelty can destroy a religion
founded on the mystery of the cross of Christ. The Church is not
diminished but increased by persecutions. And the Lord's field is
unceasingly clothed with a richer harvest, when the grains which fell
alone are multiplied in their rebirth."

Nevertheless, there are many dwellings in the Father's house, and for
those whose heart is consumed by the Holy Spirit many ways of dying to
themselves and of coming to the holy joy of the resurrection. The
shedding of blood is not the only path. Yet the combat for the kingdom
necessarily includes passing through a passion of love, which the
spiritual masters have spoken of in excellent ways. And here their
interior experiences meet, in the very diversity of mystical
traditions, in the East as in the West. They attest to the same path
for the soul: per crucem ad lucem, and from this world to the Father,
in the life-giving breath of the Spirit.

Each of these spiritual masters has left us a message of joy. The
Fathers of the East abound in testimonies about this joy in the Holy
Spirit. [11]Origen, for example, often describes the joy of the one who
has intimate knowledge of Jesus: "His soul is then inundated with joy,
like that of the old Simeon. In the temple which is the Church he
embraces Jesus in his arms. He enjoys the plenitude of salvation,
holding Him in whom God reconciles the world to Himself." In the Middle
Ages, among many others, a master of spirituality in the East, Nicholas
Cabasilas, endeavors to show how the love of God for Himself procures
the maximum of joy. In the West, it is sufficient to cite the names of
some of those who have taught the way to holiness and joy: Saint
Augustine, Saint Bernard, Saint Dominic, Saint Ignatius Loyola, Saint
John of the Cross, Saint Teresa of Avila, Saint Francis de Sales and
Saint John Bosco.

We would like to evoke more especially three figures that are still
very attractive today for the Christian people as a whole. First of
all, the poor man of Assisi, in whose footsteps numbers of Holy Year
pilgrims are endeavoring to follow. Having left everything for the
Lord, Saint Francis rediscovers through holy poverty something, so to
speak, of the original blessedness, when the world came forth intact
from the hands of the Creator. In the most extreme abnegation, half
blind, he was able to chant the unforgettable Canticle of the
Creatures, the praise of our brother the sun, of all nature, which had
become transparent for him and like a pure mirror of God's glory. He
could even express joy at the arrival of "our sister bodily death":
"Blessed are those who will be conformed to your most holy will...."

In more recent times, Saint Therese of Lisieux shows us the courageous
way of abandonment into the hands of God to whom she entrusts her
littleness. And yet it is not that she has no experience of the feeling
of God's absence, a feeling which our century is harshly experiencing:
"Sometimes it seems that the little bird (to which she compared
herself) cannot believe that anything else exists except the clouds
that envelop it.... This is the moment of perfect joy for the poor,
weak little thing.... What happiness for it to remain there
nevertheless, and to gaze at the invisible light that hides from its
faith."

And then how could one fail to recall the luminous figure and example
for our generation of Blessed Maximilian Kolbe, the authentic disciple
of Saint Francis? In the most tragic trials which have bloodied our
age, he offered himself voluntarily to death in order to save an
unknown brother, and the witnesses report that his interior peace,
serenity and joy somehow transformed the place of suffering - which was
usually like an image of hell - into the antechamber of eternal life,
both for his unfortunate companions and for himself.

In the life of the Church's sons and daughters, this sharing in the joy
of the Lord cannot be dissociated from the celebration of the
Eucharistic mystery, at which they are nourished with His Body and
Blood. For being thus sustained like travelers, on the road to
eternity, they already receive sacramentally the first fruits of
eschatological joy.

Situated in this perspective, the vast and profound joy infused already
here below into the hearts of the truly faithful cannot but appear as
"self-multiplying," just like the life and love of which it is a happy
manifestation. Joy is the result of a human-divine communion, and
aspires to a communion ever more universal. In no way can it encourage
the person who enjoys it to have an attitude of preoccupation with
self. Joy gives the heart a catholic openness to the world of people,
at the same time that it wounds the heart with a longing for eternal
bliss. Among the fervent, joy deepens their awareness of being exiles,
but it guards them from the temptation to desert the place of their
combat for the coming of the kingdom. It makes them hasten actively
towards the heavenly consummation of the nuptials of the Lamb. It is
peacefully stretched between the moment of earthly toil and the peace
of the eternal dwelling, in conformity with the Spirit's force of
attraction: "If then, already here below, because we have received this
pledge (of the Spirit of sonship), we exclaim `Abba, Father!' what will
it be like when we shall be raised and see Him face to face? When all
the members, like an immense flood, will burst forth in a hymn of
exultation glorifying Him who has raised them from the dead and given
them eternal life? For if simple pledges, enveloping man on all sides,
already make him exclaim `Abba, Father,' what will the full grace of
the Spirit not do when it is given to men by God? It will make us like
Him and will accomplish the will of the Father, for it will make man to
the image and likeness of God." Already here below the saints give us a
foretaste of this likeness.

In listening to this harmony of the many voices of the saints, have we
forgotten the present condition of human society, apparently so little
oriented towards things supernatural? Have we overestimated the
spiritual aspirations of the Christians of the present time? Have we
limited our exhortation to a small number of wise and learned people?
We cannot forget that the Gospel with its so simple splendor and
complete content was first announced to the poor and the humble.

If we have evoked this bright horizon of Christian joy, it is in no way
with the idea of discouraging any of you, dear brothers and sons and
daughters, who feel your heart divided when God's call reaches you.
Quite the contrary; we feel that our joy, like yours, will only be
complete if we look together, with full confidence, to Him "who leads
us in our faith and brings it to perfection; for the sake of the joy
which was still in the future, he endured the cross, disregarding the
shamefulness of it, and from now on has taken his place at the right of
God's throne. Think of the way he stood such opposition from sinners
and then you will not give up for want of courage."

The invitation given by God the Father to share fully in the joy of
Abraham, in the everlasting feast of the nuptials of the Lamb, is a
universal convocation. Everyone, provided he makes himself attentive
and available, can perceive this invitation in the depths of his heart,
especially in this Holy Year when the Church opens more abundantly to
all the riches of God's mercy. "The promise that was made is for you
and your children, and for all those who are far away, for all those
whom the Lord our God will call to himself."

We cannot think of the People of God in an abstract way. Our gaze rests
first of all on the world of children. As long as they find in the love
of those close to them the security which they need, they have a
capacity for welcoming, for wonderment, for confidence and for
spontaneous giving. They are apt subjects for Gospel joy. Whoever
wishes to enter the kingdom of heaven, Jesus tells us, must first study
children.

We include also all those who are deeply involved in family,
professional and social responsibility. The burden of their charges, in
a fast-moving world, too often prevents them from enjoying daily joys.
Nevertheless such joys do exist. The Holy Spirit wants to help these
people rediscover these joys, to purify them, to share them.

We think of the world of the suffering, we think of all those who have
reached the evening of their lives. God's joy is knocking at the door
of their physical and moral sufferings, not indeed with irony, but to
achieve therein His paradoxical work of transfiguration.

Our heart and mind turn also to all those who live beyond the visible
sphere of the People of God. By bringing their lives into harmony with
the innermost appeal of their conscience, which is the echo of God's
voice, they are on the road to joy.

But the People of God cannot go forward without guides. These are the
pastors, the theologians, the spiritual directors, the priests and
those who collaborate with them in the animation of Christian
communities. Their mission is to help their brethren to take the paths
of Gospel joy, in the midst of the realities which make up their lives
and from which they cannot flee.

Yes, it is the immense love of God which is summoning towards the
heavenly City those who are coming in this Holy Year from the different
points of the compass, whether they be near or still far off. And
because all those who are summoned - all of us in fact - remain to some
extent sinners, we must today cease to harden our hearts, in order to
listen to the voice of the Lord and accept the offer of the great
pardon, as Jeremiah announced it: "I will cleanse them of every sin
they have committed against me; the sins by which they offended me and
apostatized from me, all these I will forgive. And Jerusalem shall be
my theme of joy, my honor and my boast before all the nations of the
earth." And just as this promise of pardon, and many others, find their
definite meaning in the redeeming sacrifice of Jesus, the Suffering
Servant, it is He, and He alone, who can say to us, in this crucial
moment of mankind's life: "Repent, and believe the Good News." The Lord
wishes above all to make us understand that the conversion demanded of
us is in no way a backward step, as sin is. It is rather a setting out,
an advancement in true freedom and in joy. It is the response to an
invitation coming from Him - an invitation that is loving, respectful
and pressing at the same time: "Come to me, all you who labor and are
overburdened, and I will give you rest. Shoulder my yoke and learn from
me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for
your souls!"

In fact, what burden is more crushing than that of sin? What distress
more lonely than that of the prodigal son, described by the evangelist
Saint Luke? On the other hand, what meeting is more overwhelming than
that of the Father, patient and merciful, and the son returned to life?
"There will be more rejoicing in heaven over one repentant sinner than
over ninety-nine virtuous men who have no need of repentance." And who
is without sin, apart from Christ and His Immaculate Mother? Thus, by
its invitation to return to the Father by repentance, the Holy Year - a
promise of jubilation for all the people - is also a call to rediscover
the meaning and the practice of the sacrament of Reconciliation.
Following the line of the best spiritual tradition, we remind the
faithful and their pastors that the confessing of grave sins is
necessary and that frequent confession remains a privileged source of
holiness, peace and joy.

Without detracting from the fervor of our message to the whole of the
People of God, we wish to take the time to address ourself at greater
length to the world of the young. We do so with special hope.

If in fact the Church, regenerated by the Holy Spirit, in a certain
sense constitutes the true youth of the world, as long as she remains
faithful to her being and to her mission, how could she fail
spontaneously and preferably to recognize herself in those who feel
themselves to be the bearers of life and hope and of the task of
ensuring that there will be a tomorrow for the history of today? And
vice versa, how can those who in every period of this history more
intensely experience in themselves the impetus of life, the expectation
of hope for the future, the need for true renewal, not be secretly in
harmony with a Church animated by the Spirit of Christ? How could they
not expect from the Church the revelation of her secret of permanent
youth, and therefore the joy of their own youth?

We think that in fact such a correspondence exists, not always visibly,
but certainly deep down, despite many accidental contradictions. This
is why, in this Exhortation on Christian Joy, our mind and heart urge
us to turn very decisively to the young people of today. We do so in
the name of Christ and of His Church which, despite her human failings,
He wishes to be "glorious, with no speck or wrinkle or anything like
that, but holy and faultless."

In doing so we are not giving way to a sentimental cult of youth.
Considered only from the viewpoint of age, youth is a short-lived
thing. The excessive attention that is given to it quickly becomes
nostalgic or ridiculous. But this is not true in what concerns the
spiritual meaning of this moment of grace: youth lived in the proper
way. What catches our attention is essentially the correspondence
between the soaring impulse of a being which is naturally receptive to
the appeals and demands of his high destiny as a person, and the
dynamism of the Holy Spirit, from whom the Church ceaselessly receives
her own youthfulness, her substantial fidelity to herself and, at the
heart of this faithfulness, her living creativity. It is a
correspondence which is transitory and threatened, yes, but still full
of meaning and rich in generous promises. From the encounter between
the human being which, for a few decisive years, has youth at his
command, and the Church in her permanent spiritual youthfulness, there
necessarily arises, on both sides, a joy of high quality and a fruitful
promise.

The Church, as the People of God on pilgrimage towards the future
kingdom, must be able to perpetuate herself, and therefore renew
herself down succeeding human generations. For her this is a condition
for fruitfulness, and even simply for life itself. It is therefore
necessary that at each moment of her history the rising generation
should in some way fulfill the hope of the preceding generations, the
very hope of the Church, which is to transmit without end the gift of
God, the Truth and the Life. This is why in every generation young
Christians must ratify, with full consciousness and unconditionally,
the covenant entered into by them in the sacrament of [12]Baptism and
reinforced in the sacrament of Confirmation.

In this regard our age of profound change is not without grave
difficulties for the Church. We who have, together with the whole
College of Bishops, "anxiety for all the churches" and preoccupation
for their immediate future, are well aware of this. But at the same
time, being supported by faith and hope which does not disappoint us,
we are sure that grace will not fail the Christian people, and we hope
that they themselves will not fail grace, or reject - as some today are
gravely tempted to do - the inheritance of truth and holiness handed
down to this decisive moment in the history of the world. And - this is
the point - we think that we have every reason to have confidence in
Christian youth: youth will not fail the Church if within the Church
there are enough older people able to understand it, to love it, to
guide it and to open up to it a future by passing on to it with
complete fidelity the Truth which endures. Then new workers, resolute
and fervent, will in their turn enter upon spiritual and apostolic work
in the fields which are white and ready for the harvest. Then the sower
and the reaper will share the same joy of the kingdom.

It seems to us in fact that the present world crisis, which is marked
by a great confusion among many young people, partly betrays a senile
and definitely out-of-date aspect of a commercial, hedonistic and
materialistic civilization which is still trying to present itself as
the gateway to the future. Even in its very excesses, the instinctive
reaction of many young people against this illusion takes on a certain
importance. This generation is waiting for something else. Having
suddenly been deprived of protective traditions, then bitterly deceived
by the vanity and spiritual vacuum of false novelties, atheistic
ideologies and certain deleterious forms of mysticism, will not this
generation come to discover or rediscover the sure and unalterable
newness of the divine mystery revealed in Jesus Christ? Has not He, in
the splendid words of Saint Irenaeus, "brought all newness by bringing
His own person"?

And this is why we are pleased to dedicate more expressly to you, the
young Christians of the present day, the promise of the Church of
tomorrow, this celebration of spiritual joy. We cordially urge you to
be attentive to the inner appeals which come to you. We urge you to
raise up your eyes, your hearts, your fresh energies, to the heights,
to accept the effort of the soul's yearnings. And we wish to give you
this assurance: however debilitating the prejudice diffused everywhere
today, of the human spirit's inability to discover permanent and
life-giving Truth, equally profound and liberating is the joy of divine
Truth finally recognized in the Church: gaudium de Veritate. This is
the joy which is offered to you. It gives itself to those who love it
enough to seek it tenaciously. By disposing yourselves to accept it and
to communicate it, you will ensure together your own fulfillment in
Christ and the next historical stage of the People of God.

The Holy Year with its pilgrimage forms a natural part in this journey
of the whole People of God. The grace of the Jubilee is in fact
obtained at the cost of setting out and of a journey towards God, in
faith, hope and love. By varying the means and the times of this
Jubilee, we have wished to make it easier for everyone. The essential
element remains the inner decision to respond to the call of the
Spirit, in a personal manner, as a disciple of Jesus, as a child of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church and according to the intention of this
Church. The remainder is in the order of signs and means. Yes, the
desired pilgrimage is, for the People of God as a whole, and for each
individual within it, a movement, a Passover, that is to say, a journey
to the inner place where the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit
welcome one into their own intimacy and divine unity: "If anyone loves
me...my Father will love him, and we shall come to him and make our
home with him." To reach this presence always presupposes a deepening
of true knowledge of oneself, as a creature and as a child of God.

Was it not an inner renewal of this kind that the recent Council
fundamentally desired? Assuredly we have here a work of the Spirit, a
gift of Pentecost. One must also recognize a prophetic intuition on the
part of our predecessor John XXIII, who envisaged a kind of new
Pentecost as a fruit of the Council. We too have wished to place
ourself in the same perspective and in the same attitude of
expectation. Not that Pentecost has ever ceased to be an actuality
during the whole history of the Church, but so great are the needs and
the perils of the present age, so vast the horizon of mankind drawn
towards world coexistence and powerless to achieve it, that there is no
salvation for it except in a new outpouring of the gift of God. Let Him
then come, the Creating Spirit, to renew the face of the earth! In this
Holy Year, we have invited you to make, either materially or in spirit
and intention, a pilgrimage to Rome, that is, to the heart of the
Catholic Church. But obviously Rome does not constitute the goal of our
pilgrimage in time. No holy city here below constitutes this goal. This
goal is hidden beyond this world, in the heart of God's mystery which
is still invisible to us. For it is in faith that we journey, not in
clear vision, and what we shall be has not yet been manifested. The New
Jerusalem of which we are already citizens and sons and daughters,
comes down from above, from God. Of this only lasting city we have not
yet contemplated the splendor, except as in a mirror and in a confused
way, by holding fast to the prophetic word. But already we are its
citizens, or we are invited to become so; every spiritual pilgrimage
receives its interior meaning from this ultimate destination.

And so it was with the Jerusalem praised by the psalmists. Jesus
Himself and Mary His Mother sang on earth as they went up to Jerusalem
the canticles of Zion: "perfection of beauty," "joy to the whole
world." But henceforth it is from Christ that the Jerusalem above
receives its attraction, and it is towards Him that we are making our
inner journey.

And so it is with Rome where the holy Apostles Peter and Paul gave with
their blood their final witness. The vocation of Rome is of apostolic
origin, and the ministry which it is our lot to exercise here is a
service for the benefit of the entire Church and of mankind. But it is
an irreplaceable service, because it has pleased the Wisdom of God to
place the Rome of Peter and Paul, so to speak, on the road that leads
to the eternal City, by the fact that Wisdom chose to confide to Peter
- who unifies in himself the College of Bishops - the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. What remains here, not through the effect of man's
will but through the free and merciful benevolence of the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit, is the soliditas Petri, such as our
predecessor Saint Leo the Great extolled in unforgettable terms: "Saint
Peter does not cease to preside over his See, and preserves an endless
sharing with the Sovereign Priest. The firmness that he received from
the Rock which is Christ, he himself, having become the Rock, transmits
it equally to his successors too; and wherever there appears a certain
firmness, there is manifested without doubt the strength of the
Pastor.... Thus there is, in full vigor and life, in the Prince of the
Apostles, this love of God and of men which has been daunted neither by
the confinement of prison, nor chains, nor the pressures of the crowd
nor the threats of kings; and the same is true of his invincible faith,
which has not wavered in the combat or grown lukewarm in victory."

It is always our wish, but still more in this Catholic celebration of
the Holy Year, that you may experience with us, both in Rome and in
every Church conscious of the duty of being in harmony with the
authentic tradition preserved in Rome, "how good, how delightful it is
for all to live together like brothers."

A common joy, truly supernatural, a gift of the Spirit of unity and
love, which is not possible in truth except where the preaching of the
faith is accepted in its entirety, according to the apostolic norm. For
then although this faith "is spread throughout the world the Catholic
Church guards it carefully, as if it dwelt in a single home, and she
believes it unanimously, as if it had but a single soul and a single
heart; and in perfect accord she preaches it, teaches it and transmits
it, as though it had only one mouth."

This "single home," this single "heart" and "soul," this "one mouth"
are indispensable to the Church and to humanity in its entirety, so
that there may be raised permanently here below, in unison with the
Jerusalem above, the new canticle, the hymn of divine joy. And this is
the reason why we ourself must render witness humbly, patiently and
perseveringly - even though it be amid the incomprehension of many - to
the charge received from the Lord, that of leading the flock and of
confirming our brethren. But in how many ways it is our lot to be in
our turn comforted by the very thought of you all, in order to
accomplish our apostolic mission for the service of the universal
Church and the glory of God the Father!

In the middle of this Holy Year we have considered it fidelity to the
inspirations of the Holy Spirit to ask Christians thus to return to the
sources of joy.

Beloved brethren and sons and daughters, is it not normal that joy
should dwell in us, when our hearts contemplate or rediscover, in
faith, the fundamental and simple reasons for joy? God has so loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son; through His Spirit, God's
presence does not cease to enfold us with His tenderness and to fill us
with His life; and we are journeying towards the blessed
transfiguration of our life in the path of the resurrection of Jesus.
Yes, it would be very strange if this Good News, which evokes the
alleluia of the Church, did not give us the look of those who are
saved. The joy of being Christian, of being united with the Church, of
being "in Christ," and in the state of grace with God, is truly able to
fill the human heart. Is it not this profound exultation that gives all
overwhelming accent to the Memorial of Pascal: "Joy, joy, joy, tears of
joy"? And near to us, how many writers there are who know how to
express in a new form - we are thinking, for example, of Georges
Bernanos - this evangelical joy of the humble which shines forth
everywhere in the world and which speaks of God's silence!

Joy always springs from a certain outlook on man and on God. "When your
eye is sound, your whole body too is filled with light." We are
touching here on the original and inalienable dimension of the human
person: his vocation to happiness always passes through the channels of
knowledge and love, of contemplation and action. May you attain this
good quality which is in your brother's soul, and this divine presence
so close to the human heart!

Let the agitated members of various groups therefore reject the
excesses of systematic and destructive criticism! Without departing
from a realistic viewpoint, let Christian communities become centers of
optimism, where all the members resolutely endeavor to perceive the
positive aspect of people and events. "Love does not rejoice in what is
wrong but rejoices with the truth. There is no limit to love's
forbearance, to its trust, its hope, its power to endure."

The attainment of such an outlook is not just a matter of psychology.
It is also a fruit of the Holy Spirit. This Spirit, who dwells fully in
the person of Jesus, made Him during His earthly life so alert to the
joys of daily life, so tactful and persuasive for putting sinners back
on the road to a new youth of heart and mind! It is this same Spirit
who animated the Blessed Virgin and each of the saints. It is this same
Spirit who still today gives to so many Christians the joy of living
day by day their particular vocation, in the peace and hope which
surpass setbacks and sufferings. It is the Spirit of Pentecost who
today leads very many followers of Christ along the paths of prayer, in
the cheerfulness of filial praise, towards the humble and joyous
service of the disinherited and of those on the margins of society. For
joy cannot be dissociated from sharing. In God Himself, all is joy
because all is giving.

This positive outlook on people and things, the fruit of an enlightened
human spirit and the fruit of the Holy Spirit, finds in Christians a
privileged place of replenishment: the celebration of the Paschal
Mystery of Jesus. In His passion, death and resurrection, Christ
summarizes the history of each man and of all men, with their weight of
sufferings and sins, with their capacities for progress and holiness.
This is why our last word in this exhortation is a pressing appeal to
all the leaders and animators of the Christian communities: let them
not be afraid to insist time and time again on the need for baptized
Christians to be faithful to the Sunday celebration, in joy, of the
Eucharist. How could they neglect this encounter, this banquet which
Christ prepares for us in His love? Let participation in this
celebration be at the same time very dignified and festive! It is the
crucified and glorious Christ who passes among His disciples to bring
them together into the renewal of His resurrection. This is the
culmination here below of the alliance of love between God and His
people: the sign and source of Christian joy, the preparation for the
eternal feast.

May the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit draw you to it! And on
our part we bless you with all our heart.

Given in Rome, at Saint Peter's, on May 9, 1975, the twelfth year of
our Pontificate.

