____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 10 October 2007 - Saint Hilary of
Poitiers

[10]statue of Saint Hilaire of Poitier; by Franz Anton Koch, 1742;
Saint Michael parish church, Mondsee, Upper Austria; photgraphed on 11
May 2009 by Wolfgang Sauber; swiped from Wikimedia Commons Today, I
would like to talk about a great Father of the Church of the West,
Saint Hilary of Poitiers, one of the important Episcopal figures of the
fourth century. In the controversy with the Arians, who considered
Jesus the Son of God to be an excellent human creature but only human,
Hilary devoted his whole life to defending faith in the divinity of
Jesus Christ, Son of God and God as the Father who generated him from
eternity.

We have no reliable information on most of Hilary's life. Ancient
sources say that he was born in Poitiers, probably in about the year
310 A.D. From a wealthy family, he received a solid literary education,
which is clearly recognizable in his writings. It does not seem that he
grew up in a Christian environment. He himself tells us of a quest for
the truth which led him little by little to recognize God the Creator
and the incarnate God who died to give us eternal life. Baptized in
about 345, he was elected Bishop of his native city around 353-354. In
the years that followed, Hilary wrote his first work, Commentary on
Saint Matthew's Gospel. It is the oldest extant commentary in Latin on
this Gospel. In 356, Hilary took part as a Bishop in the Synod of
BÃ©ziers in the South of France, the "synod of false apostles", as he
himself called it since the assembly was in the control of Philo-Arian
Bishops who denied the divinity of Jesus Christ. "These false apostles"
asked the Emperor Constantius to have the Bishop of Poitiers sentenced
to exile. Thus, in the summer of 356, Hilary was forced to leave Gaul.

Banished to Phrygia in present-day Turkey, Hilary found himself in
contact with a religious context totally dominated by Arianism. Here
too, his concern as a Pastor impelled him to work strenuously to
re-establish the unity of the Church on the basis of right faith as
formulated by the Council of Nicea. To this end he began to draft his
own best-known and most important dogmatic work: De Trinitate (On the
Trinity). Hilary explained in it his personal journey towards knowledge
of God and took pains to show that not only in the New Testament but
also in many Old Testament passages, in which Christ's mystery already
appears, Scripture clearly testifies to the divinity of the Son and his
equality with the Father. To the Arians he insisted on the truth of the
names of Father and Son, and developed his entire Trinitarian theology
based on the formula of Baptism given to us by the Lord himself: "In
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit".

The Father and the Son are of the same nature. And although several
passages in the New Testament might make one think that the Son was
inferior to the Father, Hilary offers precise rules to avoid misleading
interpretations: some Scriptural texts speak of Jesus as God, others
highlight instead his humanity. Some refer to him in his pre-existence
with the Father; others take into consideration his state of emptying
of self (kenosis), his descent to death; others, finally, contemplate
him in the glory of the Resurrection. In the years of his exile, Hilary
also wrote the Book of Synods in which, for his brother Bishops of
Gaul, he reproduced confessions of faith and commented on them and on
other documents of synods which met in the East in about the middle of
the fourth century. Ever adamant in opposing the radical Arians, Saint
Hilary showed a conciliatory spirit to those who agreed to confess that
the Son was essentially similar to the Father, seeking of course to
lead them to the true faith, according to which there is not only a
likeness but a true equality of the Father and of the Son in divinity.
This too seems to me to be characteristic: the spirit of reconciliation
that seeks to understand those who have not yet arrived and helps them
with great theological intelligence to reach full faith in the true
divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ.

In 360 or 361, Hilary was finally able to return home from exile and
immediately resumed pastoral activity in his Church, but the influence
of his magisterium extended in fact far beyond its boundaries. A synod
celebrated in Paris in 360 or 361 borrows the language of the Council
of Nicea. Several ancient authors believe that this anti-Arian turning
point of the Gaul episcopate was largely due to the fortitude and
docility of the Bishop of Poitiers. This was precisely his gift: to
combine strength in the faith and docility in interpersonal relations.
In the last years of his life he also composed the Treatises on the
Psalms, a commentary on 58 Psalms interpreted according to the
principle highlighted in the introduction to the work: "There is no
doubt that all the things that are said in the Psalms should be
understood in accordance with Gospel proclamation, so that, whatever
the voice with which the prophetic spirit has spoken, all may be
referred nevertheless to the knowledge of the coming of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Incarnation, Passion and Kingdom, and to the power and
glory of our resurrection" (Instructio Psalmorum, 5). He saw in all the
Psalms this transparency of the mystery of Christ and of his Body which
is the Church. Hilary met Saint Martin on various occasions: the future
Bishop of Tours founded a monastery right by Poitiers, which still
exists today. Hilary died in 367. His liturgical Memorial is celebrated
on 13 January. In 1851 Blessed Pius IX proclaimed him a Doctor of the
universal Church.

To sum up the essentials of his doctrine, I would like to say that
Hilary found the starting point for his theological reflection in
baptismal faith. In De Trinitate, Hilary writes: Jesus "has commanded
us to baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit (cf. Matthew 28: 19), that is, in the confession of the Author,
of the Only-Begotten One and of the Gift. The Author of all things is
one alone, for one alone is God the Father, from whom all things
proceed. And one alone is Our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom all
things exist (cf. I Cor 8: 6), and one alone is the Spirit (cf. Eph 4:
4), a gift in all.... In nothing can be found to be lacking so great a
fullness, in which the immensity in the Eternal One, the revelation in
the Image, joy in the Gift, converge in the Father, in the Son and in
the Holy Spirit" (De Trinitate 2, 1). God the Father, being wholly
love, is able to communicate his divinity to his Son in its fullness. I
find particularly beautiful the following formula of Saint Hilary: "God
knows not how to be anything other than love, he knows not how to be
anyone other than the Father. Those who love are not envious and the
one who is the Father is so in his totality. This name admits no
compromise, as if God were father in some aspects and not in others"
(ibid., 9, 61).

For this reason the Son is fully God without any gaps or diminishment.
"The One who comes from the perfect is perfect because he has all, he
has given all" (ibid., 2, 8). Humanity finds salvation in Christ alone,
Son of God and Son of man. In assuming our human nature, he has united
himself with every man, "he has become the flesh of us all" (Tractatus
super Psalmos 54, 9); "he took on himself the nature of all flesh and
through it became true life, he has in himself the root of every vine
shoot" (ibid., 51, 16). For this very reason the way to Christ is open
to all - because he has drawn all into his being as a man -, even if
personal conversion is always required: "Through the relationship with
his flesh, access to Christ is open to all, on condition that they
divest themselves of their former self (cf. Eph 4: 22), nailing it to
the Cross (cf. Col 2: 14); provided we give up our former way of life
and convert in order to be buried with him in his baptism, in view of
life (cf. Col 1: 12; Rom 6: 4)" (ibid., 91, 9).

Fidelity to God is a gift of his grace. Therefore, Saint Hilary asks,
at the end of his Treatise on the Trinity, to be able to remain ever
faithful to the baptismal faith. It is a feature of this book:
reflection is transformed into prayer and prayer returns to reflection.
The whole book is a dialogue with God.

I would like to end today's Catechesis with one of these prayers, which
thus becomes our prayer:

"Obtain, O Lord", Saint Hilary recites with inspiration, "that I may
keep ever faithful to what I have professed in the symbol of my
regeneration, when I was baptized in the Father, in the Son and in the
Holy Spirit. That I may worship you, our Father, and with you, your
Son; that I may deserve your Holy Spirit, who proceeds from you through
your Only Begotten Son... Amen" (De Trinitate 12, 57).

