____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 17 March 2010 - Saint Bonaventure
of Bagnoregio, part 3

[10]Saint Bonaventure of Bagnoregio This morning, continuing last
Wednesday's reflection, I would like to study with you some other
aspects of the doctrine of Saint Bonaventure of Bagnoregio. He is an
eminent theologian who deserves to be set beside another great thinker,
a contemporary of his, Saint Thomas Aquinas. Both scrutinized the
mysteries of Revelation, making the most of the resources of human
reason, in the fruitful dialogue between faith and reason that
characterized the Christian Middle Ages, making it a time of great
intellectual vigour, as well as of faith and ecclesial renewal, which
is often not sufficiently emphasized. Other similarities link them:
Both Bonaventure, a Franciscan, and Thomas, a Dominican, belonged to
the Mendicant Orders which, with their spiritual freshness, as I
mentioned in previous Catecheses, renewed the whole Church in the 13th
century and attracted many followers. They both served the Church with
diligence, passion and love, to the point that they were invited to
take part in the Ecumenical Council of Lyons in 1274, the very same
year in which they died; Thomas while he was on his way to Lyons,
Bonaventure while the Council was taking place. Even the statues of the
two Saints in Saint Peter's Square are parallel. They stand right at
the beginning of the colonnade, starting from the fa√ßade of the
Vatican Basilica; one is on the left wing and the other on the right.
Despite all these aspects, in these two great Saints we can discern two
different approaches to philosophical and theological research which
show the originality and depth of the thinking of each. I would like to
point out some of their differences.

A first difference concerns the concept of theology. Both doctors
wondered whether theology was a practical or a theoretical and
speculative science. Saint Thomas reflects on two possible contrasting
answers. The first says: theology is a reflection on faith and the
purpose of faith is that the human being become good and live in
accordance with God's will. Hence the aim of theology would be to guide
people on the right, good road; thus it is basically a practical
science. The other position says: theology seeks to know God. We are
the work of God; God is above our action. God works right action in us;
so it essentially concerns not our own doing but knowing God, not our
own actions. Saint Thomas' conclusion is: theology entails both
aspects: it is theoretical, it seeks to know God ever better, and it is
practical: it seeks to orient our life to the good. But there is a
primacy of knowledge: above all we must know God and then continue to
act in accordance with God (Summa Theologiae, 1a, q. 1, art. 4). This
primacy of knowledge in comparison with practice is significant to
Saint Thomas' fundamental orientation.

Saint Bonaventure's answer is very similar but the stress he gives is
different. Saint Bonaventure knows the same arguments for both
directions, as does Saint Thomas, but in answer to the question as to
whether theology was a practical or a theoretical science, Saint
Bonaventure makes a triple distinction he therefore extends the
alternative between the theoretical (the primacy of knowledge) and the
practical (the primacy of practice), adding a third attitude which he
calls "sapiential" and affirming that wisdom embraces both aspects. And
he continues: wisdom seeks contemplation (as the highest form of
knowledge), and has as its intention "ut boni fiamus" that we become
good, especially this: to become good (cf. Breviloquium, Prologus, 5).
He then adds: "faith is in the intellect, in such a way that it
provokes affection. For example: the knowledge that Christ died "for
us' does not remain knowledge but necessarily becomes affection, love
(Proemium in I Sent., q. 3).

His defence of theology is along the same lines, namely, of the
rational and methodical reflection on faith. Saint Bonaventure lists
several arguments against engaging in theology perhaps also widespread
among a section of the Franciscan friars and also present in our time:
that reason would empty faith, that it would be an aggressive attitude
to the word of God, that we should listen and not analyze the word of
God (cf. Letter of Saint Francis of Assisi to Saint Anthony of Padua).
The Saint responds to these arguments against theology that demonstrate
the perils that exist in theology itself saying: it is true that there
is an arrogant manner of engaging in theology, a pride of reason that
sets itself above the word of God. Yet real theology, the rational work
of the true and good theology has another origin, not the pride of
reason. One who loves wants to know his beloved better and better; true
theology does not involve reason and its research prompted by pride,
"sed propter amorem eius cui assentit [but is] motivated by love of the
One who gave his consent" (Proemium in I Sent., q. 2) and wants to be
better acquainted with the beloved: this is the fundamental intention
of theology. Thus in the end, for Saint Bonaventure, the primacy of
love is crucial.

Consequently Saint Thomas and Saint Bonaventure define the human
being's final goal, his complete happiness in different ways. For Saint
Thomas the supreme end, to which our desire is directed is: to see God.
In this simple act of seeing God all problems are solved: we are happy,
nothing else is necessary.

Instead, for Saint Bonaventure the ultimate destiny of the human being
is to love God, to encounter him and to be united in his and our love.
For him this is the most satisfactory definition of our happiness.

Along these lines we could also say that the loftiest category for
Saint Thomas is the true, whereas for Saint Bonaventure it is the good.
It would be mistaken to see a contradiction in these two answers. For
both of them the true is also the good, and the good is also the true;
to see God is to love and to love is to see. Hence it was a question of
their different interpretation of a fundamentally shared vision. Both
emphases have given shape to different traditions and different
spiritualities and have thus shown the fruitfulness of the faith: one,
in the diversity of its expressions.

Let us return to Saint Bonaventure. It is obvious that the specific
emphasis he gave to his theology, of which I have given only one
example, is explained on the basis of the Franciscan charism. The
"Poverello" of Assisi, notwithstanding the intellectual debates of his
time, had shown with his whole life the primacy of love. He was a
living icon of Christ in love with Christ and thus he made the figure
of the Lord present in his time he did not convince his contemporaries
with his words but rather with his life. In all Saint Bonaventure's
works, precisely also his scientific works, his scholarly works, one
sees and finds this Franciscan inspiration; in other words one notices
that his thought starts with his encounter with the "Poverello" of
Assisi. However, in order to understand the practical elaboration of
the topic "primacy of love" we must bear in mind yet another source:
the writings of the so-called Pseudo-Dionysius, a Syrian theologian of
the 6th century who concealed himself behind the pseudonym of Dionysius
the Areopagite. In the choice of this name he was referring, to a
figure in the Acts of the Apostles (cf. 17: 34). This theologian had
created a liturgical theology and a mystical theology, and had spoken
extensively of the different orders of angels. His writings were
translated into Latin in the ninth century. At the time of Saint
Bonaventure we are in the 13th century a new tradition appeared that
aroused the interest of the Saint and of other theologians of his
century. Two things in particular attracted Saint Bonaventure's
attention.

1. Pseudo-Dionysius speaks of nine orders of angels whose names he had
found in Scripture and then organized in his own way, from the simple
angels to the seraphim. Saint Bonaventure interprets these orders of
angels as steps on the human creature's way to God. Thus they can
represent the human journey, the ascent towards communion with God. For
Saint Bonaventure there is no doubt: Saint Francis of Assisi belonged
to the Seraphic Order, to the supreme Order, to the choir of seraphim,
namely, he was a pure flame of love. And this is what Franciscans
should have been. But Saint Bonaventure knew well that this final step
in the approach to God could not be inserted into a juridical order but
is always a special gift of God. For this reason the structure of the
Franciscan Order is more modest, more realistic, but nevertheless must
help its members to come ever closer to a seraphic existence of pure
love. Last Wednesday I spoke of this synthesis between sober realism
and evangelical radicalism in the thought and action of Saint
Bonaventure.

2. Saint Bonaventure, however, found in the writings of
Peusdo-Dionysius another element, an even more important one. Whereas
for Saint Augustine the intellectus, the seeing with reason and the
heart, is the ultimate category of knowledge, Pseudo-Dionysius takes a
further step: in the ascent towards God one can reach a point in which
reason no longer sees. But in the night of the intellect love still
sees it sees what is inaccessible to reason. Love goes beyond reason,
it sees further, it enters more profoundly into God's mystery. Saint
Bonaventure was fascinated by this vision which converged with his own
Franciscan spirituality. It is precisely in the dark night of the Cross
that divine love appears in its full grandeur; where reason no longer
sees, love sees. The final words of his "The Journey of the Mind into
God", can seem to be a superficial interpretation an exaggerated
expression of devotion devoid of content; instead, read in the light of
Saint Bonaventure's theology of the Cross, they are a clear and
realistic expression of Franciscan spirituality: "If you seek in what
manner these things occur (that is, the ascent towards God) interrogate
grace, not doctrine, desire, not understanding; the groan of praying,
not the study of reading... not light, but the fire totally inflaming,
transferring one into God" (VII 6). All this is neither
anti-intellectual nor anti-rational: it implies the process of reason
but transcends it in the love of the Crucified Christ. With this
transformation of the mysticism of Pseudo-Dionysius, Saint Bonaventure
is placed at the source of a great mystical current which has greatly
raised and purified the human mind: it is a lofty peak in the history
of the human spirit.

This theology of the Cross, born of the encounter of Pseudo-Dionysius'
theology and Franciscan spirituality, must not make us forget that
Saint Bonaventure also shares with Saint Francis of Assisi his love for
creation, his joy at the beauty of God's creation. On this point I cite
a sentence from the first chapter of the "Journey": "He who is not
brightened by such splendours of created things is blind; he who does
not awake at such clamours is deaf; he who does not praise God on
account of all these effects is mute; he who does not turn towards the
First Principle on account of such indications is stupid" (I, 15).

The whole creation speaks loudly of God, of the good and beautiful God;
of his love. Hence for Saint Bonaventure the whole of our life is a
"journey", a pilgrimage, an ascent to God. But with our own strength
alone we are incapable of climbing to the loftiness of God. God himself
must help us, must "pull" us up. Thus prayer is necessary. Prayer, says
the Saint, is the mother and the origin of the upward movement -
"sursum actio", an action that lifts us up, Bonaventure says.
Accordingly I conclude with the prayer with which he begins his
"Journey": "Let us therefore say to the Lord Our God: "Lead me forth,
Lord, in thy way, and let me step in thy truth; let my heart be glad,
that it fears thy name' " (I, 1).

