____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 10 February 2010 - Saint Anthony of
Padua

[10]a verson of the 2014 computer based forensic reconstruction of the
face of Saint Anthony of Padua based on a digital version of his skull;
swiped from Wikimedia Commons Two weeks ago I presented Saint Francis
of Assisi. This morning I would like to speak of another saint who
belonged to the first generation of the Friars Minor: Anthony of Padua,
or of Lisbon, as he is also called with reference to his native town.
He is one of the most popular Saints in the whole Catholic Church,
venerated not only in Padua, where a splendid Basilica has been built
that contains his mortal remains, but also throughout the world. Dear
to the faithful are the images and statues that portray him with the
lily a symbol of his purity or with the Child Jesus in his arms, in
memory of a miraculous apparition mentioned in several literary
sources.

With his outstanding gifts of intelligence, balance, apostolic zeal
and, primarily, mystic fervour, Anthony contributed significantly to
the development of Franciscan spirituality.

He was born into a noble family in Lisbon in about 1195 and was
baptized with the name of Fernando. He entered the Canons who followed
the monastic Rule of Saint Augustine, first at Saint Vincent's
Monastery in Lisbon and later at that of the Holy Cross in Coimbra, a
renowned cultural centre in Portugal. He dedicated himself with
interest and solicitude to the study of the Bible and of the Church
Fathers, acquiring the theological knowledge that was to bear fruit in
his teaching and preaching activities. The event that represented a
decisive turning point on his life happened in Coimbra. It was there,
in 1220, that the relics were exposed of the first five Franciscan
missionaries who had gone to Morocco, where they had met with
martyrdom. Their story inspired in young Fernando the desire to imitate
them and to advance on the path of Christian perfection. Thus he asked
to leave the Augustinian Canons to become a Friar Minor. His request
was granted and, having taken the name of Anthony, he too set out for
Morocco, but divine Providence disposed otherwise. After an illness he
was obliged to return to Italy and, in 1221, participated in the famous
"Chapter of the Mats" in Assisi, where he also met Saint Francis. He
then lived for a period in complete concealment in a convent at Forl√¨
in northern Italy, where the Lord called him to another mission.
Invited, in somewhat casual circumstances, to preach on the occasion of
a priestly ordination, he showed himself to be endowed with such
knowledge and eloquence that the Superiors assigned him to preaching.
Thus he embarked on apostolic work in Italy and France that was so
intense and effective that it induced many people who had left the
Church to retrace their footsteps. Anthony was also one of the first if
not the first theology teachers of the Friars Minor. He began his
teaching in Bologna with the blessing of Saint Francis who, recognizing
Anthony's virtues, sent him a short letter that began with these words:
"I would like you to teach the brethren theology". Anthony laid the
foundations of Franciscan theology which, cultivated by other
outstanding thinkers, was to reach its apex with Saint Bonaventure of
Bagnoregio and Blessed Duns Scotus.

Having become Provincial Superior of the Friars Minor in northern
Italy, he continued his ministry of preaching, alternating it with his
office of governance. When his term as Provincial came to an end, he
withdrew to a place near Padua where he had stayed on various other
occasions. Barely a year later, he died at the city gates on 13 June
1231. Padua, which had welcomed him with affection and veneration in
his lifetime, has always accorded him honour and devotion. Pope Gregory
IX himself, having heard him preach, described him as the "Ark of the
Testament" and subsequent to miracles brought about through his
intercession canonized him in 1232, only a year after his death.

In the last period of his life, Anthony put in writing two cycles of
"Sermons", entitled respectively "Sunday Sermons" and "Sermons on the
Saints" destined for the Franciscan Order's preachers and teachers of
theological studies. In these Sermons he commented on the texts of
Scripture presented by the Liturgy, using the patristic and medieval
interpretation of the four senses: the literal or historical, the
allegorical or Christological, the tropological or moral, and the
anagogical, which orients a person to eternal life. Today it has been
rediscovered that these senses are dimensions of the one meaning of
Sacred Scripture and that it is right to interpret Sacred Scripture by
seeking the four dimensions of its words. Saint Anthony's sermons are
theological and homiletical texts that echo the live preaching in which
Anthony proposes a true and proper itinerary of Christian life. The
richness of spiritual teaching contained in the "Sermons" was so great
that in 1946 Venerable Pope Pius XII proclaimed Anthony a Doctor of the
Church, attributing to him the title "Doctor Evangelicus", since the
freshness and beauty of the Gospel emerge from these writings. We can
still read them today with great spiritual profit.

In these Sermons Saint Anthony speaks of prayer as of a loving
relationship that impels man to speak gently with the Lord, creating an
ineffable joy that sweetly enfolds the soul in prayer. Anthony reminds
us that prayer requires an atmosphere of silence, which does not mean
distance from external noise but rather is an interior experience that
aims to remove the distractions caused by a soul's anxieties, thereby
creating silence in the soul itself. According to this prominent
Franciscan Doctor's teaching, prayer is structured in four
indispensable attitudes which in Anthony's Latin are defined as
obsecratio, oratio, postulatio, gratiarum actio. We might translate
them in the following manner. The first step in prayer is confidently
opening one's heart to God; this is not merely accepting a word but
opening one's heart to God's presence. Next, is speaking with him
affectionately, seeing him present with oneself; then a very natural
thing presenting our needs to him; and lastly, praising and thanking
him.

In Saint Anthony's teaching on prayer we perceive one of the specific
traits of the Franciscan theology that he founded: namely the role
assigned to divine love which enters into the sphere of the affections,
of the will and of the heart, and which is also the source from which
flows a spiritual knowledge that surpasses all other knowledge. In
fact, it is in loving that we come to know.

Anthony writes further: "Charity is the soul of faith, it gives it
life; without love, faith dies" (Sermones Dominicales et Festivi II,
Messagero, Padua 1979, p. 37).

It is only the prayerful soul that can progress in spiritual life: this
is the privileged object of Saint Anthony's preaching. He is thoroughly
familiar with the shortcomings of human nature, with our tendency to
lapse into sin, which is why he continuously urges us to fight the
inclination to avidity, pride and impurity; instead of practising the
virtues of poverty and generosity, of humility and obedience, of
chastity and of purity. At the beginning of the 13th century, in the
context of the rebirth of the city and the flourishing of trade, the
number of people who were insensitive to the needs of the poor
increased. This is why on various occasions Anthony invites the
faithful to think of the true riches, those of the heart, which make
people good and merciful and permit them to lay up treasure in Heaven.
"O rich people", he urged them, "befriend... the poor, welcome them
into your homes: it will subsequently be they who receive you in the
eternal tabernacles in which is the beauty of peace, the confidence of
security and the opulent tranquillity of eternal satiety" (ibid., p.
29).

Is not this, dear friends, perhaps a very important teaching today too,
when the financial crisis and serious economic inequalities impoverish
many people and create conditions of poverty? In my Encyclical Caritas
in Veritate I recall: "The economy needs ethics in order to function
correctly not any ethics whatsoever, but an ethics which is
people-centred" (n. 45).

Anthony, in the school of Francis, always put Christ at the centre of
his life and thinking, of his action and of his preaching. This is
another characteristic feature of Franciscan theology: Christocentrism.
Franciscan theology willingly contemplates and invites others to
contemplate the mysteries of the Lord's humanity, the man Jesus, and in
a special way the mystery of the Nativity: God who made himself a Child
and gave himself into our hands, a mystery that gives rise to
sentiments of love and gratitude for divine goodness.

Not only the Nativity, a central point of Christ's love for humanity,
but also the vision of the Crucified One inspired in Anthony thoughts
of gratitude to God and esteem for the dignity of the human person, so
that all believers and non-believers might find in the Crucified One
and in his image a life-enriching meaning. Saint Anthony writes:
"Christ who is your life is hanging before you, so that you may look at
the Cross as in a mirror. There you will be able to know how mortal
were your wounds, that no medicine other than the Blood of the Son of
God could heal. If you look closely, you will be able to realize how
great your human dignity and your value are.... Nowhere other than
looking at himself in the mirror of the Cross can man better understand
how much he is worth" (Sermones Dominicales et Festivi III, pp.
213-214).

In meditating on these words we are better able to understand the
importance of the image of the Crucified One for our culture, for our
humanity that is born from the Christian faith. Precisely by looking at
the Crucified One we see, as Saint Anthony says, how great are the
dignity and worth of the human being. At no other point can we
understand how much the human person is worth, precisely because God
makes us so important, considers us so important that, in his opinion,
we are worthy of his suffering; thus all human dignity appears in the
mirror of the Crucified One and our gazing upon him is ever a source of
acknowledgement of human dignity.

Dear friends, may Anthony of Padua, so widely venerated by the
faithful, intercede for the whole Church and especially for those who
are dedicated to preaching; let us pray the Lord that he will help us
learn a little of this art from Saint Anthony. May preachers, drawing
inspiration from his example, be effective in their communication by
taking pains to combine solid and sound doctrine with sincere and
fervent devotion. In this Year for Priests, let us pray that priests
and deacons will carry out with concern this ministry of the
proclamation of the word of God, making it timely for the faithful,
especially through liturgical homilies. May they effectively present
the eternal beauty of Christ, just as Anthony recommended: "If you
preach Jesus, he will melt hardened hearts; if you invoke him he will
soften harsh temptations; if you think of him he will enlighten your
mind; if you read of him he will satifsfy your intellect" (Sermones
Dominicales et Festivi III, p. 59).

