____________________

[9]General Audience of Pope Benedict XVI, 16 August 2006 - Meditation on the
Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary

[10]Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary Today, our customary weekly
Wednesday appointment is again taking place in the atmosphere of the
Solemnity of the Blessed Virgin Mary's Assumption. I would therefore
like to ask you to turn your gaze once again to our heavenly Mother,
whom yesterday's liturgy helped us to contemplate triumphant with
Christ in Heaven.

Since the first centuries of Christianity, the Christian people has
always found this feast deeply stirring; as is well known, it
celebrates the glorification, also in body, of that creature whom God
chose as Mother and whom Jesus on the Cross gave as Mother to the whole
of humanity.

The Assumption evokes a mystery that concerns each one of us because,
as the Second Vatican Council affirms, Mary "shines forth on earth... a
sign of certain hope and comfort to the pilgrim People of God" (Lumen
Gentium, n. 68).

However, taken up by the events of each day, one can sometimes forget
this comforting spiritual reality that constitutes an important truth
of faith; so how can it be ensured that this luminous sign of hope is
ever more clearly perceived by all of us and by contemporary society?

Some people today live as if they never had to die or as if, with
death, everything were over; others, who hold that man is the one and
only author of his own destiny, behave as though God did not exist, and
at times they even reach the point of denying that there is room for
him in our world.

Yet, the great breakthroughs of technology and science that have
considerably improved humanity's condition leave unresolved the deepest
searchings of the human soul.

Only openness to the mystery of God, who is Love, can quench the thirst
for truth and happiness in our hearts; only the prospect of eternity
can give authentic value to historical events and especially to the
mystery of human frailty, suffering and death.

By contemplating Mary in heavenly glory, we understand that the earth
is not the definitive homeland for us either, and that if we live with
our gaze fixed on eternal goods we will one day share in this same
glory and the earth will become more beautiful.

Consequently, we must not lose our serenity and peace even amid the
thousands of daily difficulties. The luminous sign of Our Lady taken up
into Heaven shines out even more brightly when sad shadows of suffering
and violence seem to loom on the horizon.

We may be sure of it: from on high, Mary follows our footsteps with
gentle concern, dispels the gloom in moments of darkness and distress,
reassures us with her motherly hand.

Supported by awareness of this, let us continue confidently on our path
of Christian commitment wherever Providence may lead us. Let us forge
ahead in our lives under Mary's guidance. Thank you.

                    - [11]Pope [12]Benedict XVI, [13]16 August [14]2006

