____________________

[9]Letter to the Bishop of Aquileia, by Pope Saint Leo the Great

[10][Pope Saint Leo the Great] I. Through the negligence of the
authorities the [11]Pelagian heresy has been spreading in his province.
From the account of our holy brother and fellow-bishop Septimus which
is contained in the subjoined letter, we have understood that certain
priests and deacons and clergy of various orders in your province who
have been drawn in by the Pelagian or Caelestian heresy, have attained
to catholic communion without any recantation of their peculiar error
being required of them; and that, whilst the shepherds set to watch
were fast asleep, wolves clothed in sheep-skins but without laying
aside their bestial minds have entered into the Lord's sheep-fold: and
that they make a practice of what is not allowed even to non-offenders
by the injunctions of our canons and decrees: to wit that they should
leave the churches in which they received or regained their office and
carry their uncertainty in all directions, loving to continue wandering
and never to remain on the foundations of the Apostles. For without
being sifted by any test or bound by any previous confession of faith,
they make a great point of their right to the privilege of going to one
house after another under cover of their being in communion with the
Church, and corrupting the hearts of many through men's ignorance of
their false name. And yet I am sure they could not do this, if the
rulers of the churches had exercised their rightful diligence in the
matter of receiving such, and had not allowed any of them to wander
from place to place.

II. He orders a provincial synod to be convened to receive the
recantation of the heretics in express terms. Accordingly, lest this
should be attempted any further, and lest this pernicious habit, which
owes its introduction to certain persons' negligence, should result in
the overthrow of many souls, by this our authoritative injunction we
charge you, brother, to give diligence that a synod of the clergy of
your province be convened, and all, whether priests or deacons or
clerics of any rank who have been re-admitted from their alliance with
the [12]Pelagians and the Caelestians into catholic communion with such
precipitation that they were not first constrained to recant their
error, be now at least forced to a true correction, which can advantage
themselves and hurt no one, since their deceitfulness has in part been
disclosed. Let them by their public confession condemn the authors of
this presumptuous error and renounce all that the universal Church has
repudiated in their doctrine: and let them announce by full and open
statements, signed by their own hand, that they embrace and entirely
approve of all the synodal decrees which the authority of the Apostolic
See has ratified to the rooting out of this heresy. Let nothing
obscure, nothing ambiguous be found in their words. For we know that
their cunning is such that they reckon that the meaning of any
particular clause of their execrable doctrine can be defended if they
only keep it distinct from the main body of their damnable views.

III. The [13]Pelagian view of God's grace is unscriptural. And when
they pretend to disapprove of and give up all their definitions to
facilitate evasion through their complete art of deception, unless
their meaning is detected, they make exception of the dogma that the
grace of God is given according to the merits of the recipient. And yet
surely, unless it is given freely, it is not a gift, but a price and
compensation for merits: for the blessed Apostle says, "by grace ye
have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves but it is the
gift of God; not of works lest any should perchance be exalted. For we
are His workmanship created in Christ Jesus in good works, which God
prepared that we should walk in them." Thus every bestowal of good
works is of God's preparing: because a man is justified by grace rather
than by his own excellence: for grace is to every one the source of
righteousness, the source of good and the fountain of merit. But these
heretics say it is anticipated by men's natural goodness for this
reason, that that nature which (in their view) is before grace
conspicuous for good desires of its own, may not seem marred by any
stain of original sin, and that what the Truth says may be falsified:
"For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost."

IV. Prompt measures are essential. You must take heed, therefore,
beloved, and with great diligence make provision that offences which
have long been removed be not set up again through such men and that no
seed of the same evil spring up in your province from a doctrine which
has once been uprooted: for not only will it take root and grow, but
also will taint the future generations of the Church with its poisonous
exhalations. Those who wish to appear corrected must purge themselves
of all suspicion: and by obeying us, prove themselves ours. And if any
of them decline to satisfy our wholesome injunctions, be he cleric or
layman, he must be driven from the society of the Church lest he deal
treacherously by others' safety as well as forfeit his own soul.

V. The canons must be enforced against clerics who wonder from one
church to another. We admonish you also to restore to full working that
part of the discipline of the Church whereby the holy Fathers and we
have often in former times decreed that neither in the grade of the
priesthood nor in the order of the diaconate nor in the lower ranks of
the clergy, is any one at liberty to migrate from church to church: to
the end that each one may persevere where he was ordained without being
enticed by ambition, or led astray by greed, or corrupted by men's evil
beliefs: and thus that if any one, seeking his own interests, not those
of Jesus Christ, neglect to return to his own peoples and church, he
may be reckoned out of the pale both in respect of promotion and of the
bond of communion. But do not doubt, beloved, that we must be somewhat
sorely moved if, as we think not, our decrees for the maintenance of
the canons and the integrity of the faith be neglected: because the
short-comings of the lower orders are to be laid at the door of none so
much as of those slothful and remiss rulers who often foster much
pestilence by shrinking from the application of a stringent remedy.

