____________________

[9]Meditation for the Feast Saint Francis of Assisi, by Pope Saint John XXIII

Francis was called "another Christ", in the sense that he showed in his
life and conduct the very pith and kernel of Our Lord's teaching.

We all have to fight against the lusts of the flesh. Many people also
desire material wealth and dream of money, but Saint Francis teaches
every one of us, whatever our social condition may be, to fight against
"the lust of the eyes", which is full of deceit and vanity. The wealth
of Christian life does not consist in money and all its cares and
demands. To some extent it is necessary for our very existence, but we
must not lose our hearts to it. In the presence of his father and of
the Bishop, Francis gave up everything, even the clothes he was wearing
-- such was his love for poverty.

When Providence has enabled a man to possess more than sufficient for
his needs, he is inviting him to redistribute his wealth, to help the
poor, and to contribute to the great works in aid of human brotherhood.
This commandment is valid for all, and particularly for those who have
dedicated their lives to God's service.

Therefore, whoever has more abundant wealth must give more generously,
giving also for those who are unable to do so. The precept applies not
only to two brothers, two families or two towns, but to the whole
world. Sometimes a rich man may feel powerful, and boast of his
resources, and shut his eyes and ears to the poverty of others who are
condemned to live in want -- whereas true brotherly feeling would see
to it that the poor had at least what he needed to live. If we wish to
find a little spiritual joy on this earth we must follow after Saint
Francis, who imitated the example of Christ, who even worked miracles
in order to feed the hungry.

