____________________

[9]Praedecessores Nostros - On Aid for Ireland, by Pope Pius IX, 25 March
1847

To all Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops and Bishops. Venerable
Brothers, We give you Greetings and Our Apostolic Blessing.

You know from your study of the Church's history, that Our predecessors
in the Roman Pontificate assiduously assisted Christian nations.

You know too that this zeal included not only spiritual benefits
conferred on the Christian people, but also disaster relief whenever
calamity struck. This fact is confirmed by documents of ancient[Euseb.,
Eccles. Hist., vol. 4, p. 23 (Cambridge edition) for the letter of
Dionysius, bishop of the Corinthians, to Pope Soter at Rome where he
says that from the very start of the religion, the Roman Church used to
send to Christians the help necessary for living, and that this custom
was expanded by the blessed Bishop Soter. Likewise Euseb., Eccles
Hist., vol. 7, p. 5, recalls the letter of Dionysius, Bishop of
Alexandria to Pope Stephen I, who had sent necessary aid to the
province of Syria and Arabia. There is also a letter of Saint Basil to
Pope Damasus which speaks of aid sent by Pope Saint Dionysius, to the
church at Caesarea.] and more recent times, as well as by Our own
recollection of recent events. Who indeed could, or should, more
fittingly display this fatherly concern of spirit than those whom the
Catholic faith teaches "are the Fathers and Teachers of all
Christians"?[Council of Florence on the definition of the Faith.] And
to whom should afflicted peoples have recourse but to those who have
proved by actual deeds over a long period of time that they are
sympathetic benefactors?

2. Inspired by this notable example of Our predecessors, and at the
behest of Our own will, We immediately made every effort, as far as in
Us lay, to bring help to the Irish nation in their time of peril.
Therefore as soon as We learned that the kingdom of Ireland was
suffering a great dearth of food, both grain and other provisions, and
that the nation was hard pressed by a series of awful diseases caused
by this lack of food, We immediately came to their aid. We proclaimed
that public prayers should be made by God in this city of Ours; We
exhorted the Roman clergy and people, as well as the rest of Rome's
residents, to come to the aid of Ireland and to pray for them. By
contributing Ourselves and by collecting money in Rome, We were able to
send a contribution to Our venerable brothers, the Archbishops of
Ireland. They distributed it among the needy.

3. But letters reach Us daily from Ireland, bringing news of the
calamity worsening. We are distressed and again want to help that
nation. Ireland deserves our aid for so many reasons.

The clergy and people of Ireland have always revered the Apostolic See.
Indeed that nation has persevered in professing the Catholic religion
in all distressful times, and the Irish clergy has worked industriously
to spread the Catholic religion in the farthest parts of the globe.
Finally the Irish nation zealously honors and understands divine Peter
whose humble representative We are, and whose dignity, to quote the
words of Leo the Great, "does not fail in the person of an unworthy
heir."[Serm. 2 on the anniversary of his elevation.]

4. So, after carefully weighing this serious matter and ascertaining
also the view of several [10]cardinals on the implementation of Our
plan, We have decided to write this letter to you, venerable brothers,
so that we may provide for the needs of the Irish people.

5. In this matter We advise you all in the dioceses and districts
subject to your jurisdiction to proclaim three days of public prayers
in churches and other holy places, as has previously been done in Rome.
Do this in order to beseech God, the Father of mercies, to set the
Irish people free from this great disaster, and to prevent such a
misfortune befalling the other kingdoms and lands of Europe as well. To
encourage these prayers, We grant an indulgence of seven years to those
who are present at these prayers on any occasion; and, in addition, on
those who attend the prayers for the entire three days and who also
within a week receive the sacraments of penance and of the most holy
Eucharist, We bestow by Our Apostolic authority a plenary indulgence.

6. In addition, We urge you to exhort the people under your
jurisdiction to give [11]alms for the relief of the Irish nation. You
know the power of almsgiving and the rich fruits which proceed from it.
You know the noteworthy praises showered on almsgiving by the holy
Church Fathers and especially by Saint Leo the Great in many of his
sermons.[On the fast of the tenth month and on almsgiving.] And you
readily recall the well-known letter of Saint Cyprian, martyr and
Bishop of [12]Carthage, to the Bishops of Numidia,[Epistle 60 (Balut.
edit.) in dealing with the money collected at [13]Carthage and sent to
the bishops of Numidia for the purpose of redeeming Christians, states
that "we have sent a hundred thousand sesterces, which were collected
here in the church of which by God's kindness we are the leader, by
contribution from the clergy and people who stand firm with us. In your
diligence you will distribute this money in your district."] which
contains clear evidence of his people's zeal in generous almsgiving for
those Christians who needed help. You can, furthermore, remember the
words of Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Milan,[Epistle 2 to Bishop
Constantius (vol. 2, Maurist edit., Paris, 1690).] that "the beauty of
wealth lies not in the manner of life of the rich but in food given to
the poor; wealth is more resplendent among those who are weak and in
want; Christians should learn to use money in looking not for their own
goods but for Christ's, so that Christ in turn may look after them."
When you recall these and other praise, We hope that you will
vigorously assist the poor whom We are discussing.

7. We could indeed end Our letter here. But since you are about to
proclaim public prayers, We must add, venerable brothers, what "Our
daily urgency, the care of all the Churches"[2 Corinthians 2:28] warns
Us of, day and night: that is, the furious, savage storm that We have
seen for a long time raised up against the whole Church. Our spirit
shrinks to recall "how greatly His enemy hates the holy one"[Psalm
73:3] and what evil scheming now goes on "against the Lord and His
Christ."[Psalm 3:2] Therefore We strongly recommend that when you
proclaim public prayers for Ireland, you ask your people to beseech God
at the same time for the whole Church.

Meanwhile, venerable brothers, We most lovingly impart to you Our
Apostolic Blessing.

Given in Rome at Saint Mary Major's on the [14]25th of March, [15]1847,
in the first year of Our Pontificate.

