____________________

[8]Pope Nicholas III - Exiit qui seminat - Confirmation of the Rule of the
Friars Minor, 14 August 1279

[9]Pope Nicholas III 1. He who sows went forth from the bosom of the
Father into the world to sow His own seed, clothed with the garment of
humanity, namely, the Son of God Jesus Christ, to sow the evangelical
word among the approved and reprobate, the foolish and the learned, the
studious and the slothful, and according to the prophets to be the
farmer on earth who would disperse His own seed, the evangelical
doctrine, without destruction, among all [men], who drawing all things
to Himself had come to save each [of them], who afterwards for the
salvation of all [men] immolated His very self to God the Father as the
price of human redemption. However He allowed this seed to fall among
individuals by the communicative charity of God, not so other [seed
which He let fall] dispersed upon in the road namely upon hearts
accessible to the suggestions of the demons, [and still] other [seed
which He let fall] among thorns namely upon hearts lacerated by the
solicitude for riches, and therefore one was trampled by depraved
affections, the other by aridity, since it was lacking in the humor of
grace, the rest, suffocated by inordinate solicitudes, was overgrown,
but good ground received the other [seed] meek and docile in heart.

2. This is the meek and docile religion of the friars Minor, rooted in
poverty and humility by the gracious confessor of Christ, Francis,
which sprouting the sprout from the true seed strew the same by [means
of] the rule among his sons, whom he generated to be his own and God's
through his ministry in the observance of the Gospel. These very ones
are the sons, who by the teaching of Jacob have received the eternal
Word, the Son of God, sown by human nature in the garden of the
virginal womb [and] powerful to save souls in meekness. These are those
professors of the holy rule, which is founded on the evangelical
discourse, strengthened by the example of the life of Christ, and made
firm by the sermons and deeds of His Apostles, the founders of the
Church militant. This is in the sight of [our] God and Father [that]
clean and immaculate religion, which descending from the Father of
lights through His Son having been handed on to the Apostles verbally
and by exemplar, and at last through the Holy Spirit to blessed
Francis, and having inspired those following him, contains entirely in
itself a quasi testimony of the Trinity. This is that, to which with
Paul attesting no one for the sake of [anything] else ought to be
molested, which Christ confirmed by the stigmata of His passion,
willing [as He did] to notably mark with the sign of His very own
passion the institutor [of the said religion].

3. But the craftiness of the ancient foe has not on that account ceased
against the friars Minor themselves and against [their] rule: indeed
shining more powerfully against them to sow cockle among them he has
meanwhile stirred up rivals agitated by envy, anger and indiscreet
justice to harass the friars, and with the barkings of a dog to
lacerate their rule as illicit, unobservable and divisive, not
attending [as they do] to this holy rule, as has been said before to
have been instituted with salutary precepts and admonitions,
strengthened by apostolic remarks, confirmed by the Apostolic See,
fortified by so many divine testimonies, which has been made
exceedingly credible in so many holy men living and ending their days
in the observance of this kind of rule, of whom not a few this same See
has made to be inscribed in the album of the Saints on account of their
life and miracles, and which in almost these last days themselves by
[means of] Our predecessor Pope Gregory X of pious memory has been
approved on account of it evident utility, [and] to which, after it was
declared in the general council of Lyon, the universal Church on Her
own has adhered.

4. Nor have We been less attentive, indeed We have pondered more
profoundly, just as the rest of those who profess the catholic faith
should more subtly think [about it], because God Himself looking upon
the aforesaid order and the observers of it has thus preserved them
with salutary protection from the rancor rising up against them,
because the tempestuous wave neither smashed them nor did it terrify
the souls of those living in the order itself, rather do they grow more
ably in the vigor of regularity and they are increased in the
observance of their norms. But however so that the aforesaid order pure
and separate from whatever things that would break it up into pieces
may flourish with brightness, just as the friars of the same order
gathered in general chapter recently provided, after Our beloved sons
the ministers general and not a few other provincial of the same order,
who convened in the same chapter, have stood together in Our presence,
since their intention for a complete remark regarding the same rule is
fervently known from the vigor of their spirit; it has seemed to Us
[right] to close off the ways of attack to attacks of this kind, to
declare other doubts which could appear in the same rule, to scatter
with fuller clarity not a few things declared even by Our predecessors,
[and] to provide even in other things touching the rule itself for the
[sake of] the purity of their consciences.

5. Likewise We, who from tender years have aroused our affection for
the order itself, growing up in that time have discussed in frequent
collations with some of the same confessor's companions, to whom his
life and conversation were known, the very rule and holy intention of
blessed Francis himself; and later as a [10]cardinal and shortly
afterwards by [choice of] the same See, the order's governor,
protector, and corrector, We have handled the actual conditions of the
aforesaid order on account of Our imminent concern; driven to keep
Ourselves informed in the duty of the apostolate as much concerning the
pious intention of the aforesaid confessor as concerns those things
which the rule itself and its observance contain, on account of the
aforesaid things and even from long experience We had recourse to the
aforesaid order [itself]; and no less those things, which by Our same
predecessors are known to have been approved and declared, than even
the rule itself and its contingents, which We with full maturity have
discussed, in the sequence [of this] present [document] We have
established, declared, [and] approved more certainly, [and] We have
strengthened, described and conceded those things which have been
approved, and even others, by arranging [them] more clearly and in
order, which are expressed more fully in the following articles.

6. In the first place since, as We understand, it is hesitated by some
whether the friars of this order are bound as much to the counsels as
to the precepts of the Gospel, not only since in the beginning of the
aforesaid rule is found: "The rule and life of the friars Minor is
this, namely, to observe the Holy Gospel of Our Lord Jesus Christ by
living in obedience, without [anything of] one's own and in chastity,"
but also from that which is contained in the same rule as: "With the
year of probation truly ended let them be received to obedience
promising to observe this [very same] life and rule," and even also
since in the conclusion of the rule itself are contained these words:
"That we may observe, as we have firmly promised, the poverty and
humility and the Holy Gospel of Our Lord Jesus Christ." It was right
that Our predecessor, Pope Gregory IX, of happy memory, declared this
article and not a few others of the same rule, but since His
declaration on account of the biting insults of others rising against
the friars and [their] rule, and afterwards by considering the
occurrence of many emerging cases, seemed obscure in some things,
incomplete in others, and even insufficient regarding many things
contained in the rule itself: We, willing to remove obscurity and
insufficiency of this kind by a perfect declaration of interpretation
and to prune the scruple of whatever ambiguity regarding the same
things from the minds of individuals by the certitude of a fuller
exposition, say that since in the beginning of the rule not absolutely
but with a certain modification or determination or specification is
placed: "The rule and life of the friars Minor is this, namely, to
observe the Holy Gospel of Our Lord Jesus Christ by living in
obedience, without [anything of] one's own and in chastity," which
three follows the same rule with much art and nonetheless subjoining
not a few others by precepting, prohibiting, counseling, warning, and
exhorting, and under [the form of] other words reducible to something
of the manner of precepts, it should be established more clearly
concerning the intention of the rule so that that which seems to be
subjoined almost absolutely in profession: "promising always to observe
this very same life and rule:" might be entirely reduced to the
principle (modified, determined, or specified) of this rule, namely, to
the observance of the Gospel, as has been said, by this same rule,
modified or determined or specified in these three [vows]; since it can
not have the likeness of the truth that the same holy word came forth
from him (Francis) and at the same time with a certain modification or
determination or specification; as if it is right that he wanted it
repeated, in the repetition he himself made, somewhat succinctly by
omitting modification or determination or specification without certain
cause, and as the arguments of both [civil and canon] law teach Us, the
things which [are] in the beginning [of the rule], refer to the middle
and to the end; indeed those things which [are] in the middle [are]
often refer to the end and to the beginning, and the things which [are]
at the end [likewise refer] to one or to other of them. And given that
it might be absolutely declared that in [its] entirety: "I promise to
observe the Holy Gospel," unless the professor of this kind intended to
oblige himself to the observance of all the counsels, which hardly or
never could he observe to the letter; on account of which such a
promise would seem to ensnare the soul of the one who professes,
clearly it would seem that a promise of this kind should not be binding
to any conscience without the intention of the one promising, unless
the observance of the Gospel be [understood] as the teaching explained
by Christ, namely that the precepts be observed by the ones promising
as precepts and the counsels as counsels. It is patently clear that
blessed Francis had the same understanding even regarding the same
words in the arrangement of his proceeding; since he indicates some
Evangelical counsels as counsels with words of admonition, exhortation
and counsel, truly not a few with prohibition and a word of precept: by
which it is clear that it was not the intention of the one speaking,
that the friars from the profession of this kind of rule would be held
bound to all the counsels as to Evangelical precepts; but only as to
those counsels, which are expressed in the same rule as precepts or
prohibitions or under words equipollent words. Whence for the quieting
of the consciences of the friars of this same order We declare that
from the profession of this same rule the friars themselves are bound
to observe those things as Evangelical counsels which are expressed in
the rule itself as precepts or prohibitions or under equipollent words.
Indeed to not a few other counsels given by the Gospel are they more
greatly bound, according to the exigencies of their state, than are the
rest of Christians, since by the state of perfection, which they have
assumed by a profession of this kind, they have offered themselves as a
holocaust of the heart to the Lord by [their] contempt of all mundane
things. But to all things which are contained in the rule, whether
precepts or counsels or other things, they are not otherwise bound by a
vow of this kind of profession except in that manner, in which they are
treated in the rule itself, so that they are bound to the observance of
the things, namely, which are indicated in the same rule under
obligatory words: indeed to pursue the observance of other things,
which are contained under words admonishing, exhorting, informing and
instructing, or in whatever way otherwise, is so much more fitting on
account of its goodness and equity, by which the imitators of so great
a Father choose the stricter paths of imitating of Christ.

7. Moreover since the rule itself expressly contains that the friars
may appropriate nothing to themselves neither house nor place nor any
thing, and [thus] has it been declared by the same predecessor, Pope
Gregory IX, and by not a few others, that this ought to be observed not
only individually but also in common, which so strict an abdication
insensate cleverness has distorted with livid detractions, lest the
clarity of the perfection of the same friars wound with unskillful
sermons of such ones, We say that the abdication of this kind of
property over all things not only individually but also in common is in
the sight of God meritorious and holy, which Christ showing the way to
perfection both taught by word and strengthened by example, and which
the first founders of the Church militant, just as [streams which] had
grown from the spring itself, in willing to live perfectly diverted
along their own stream-beds of doctrine and life, nor did anyone think
to withstand them because sometimes it is said that Christ had a purse;
for so Christ Himself, whose works are perfect, in His acts walked the
way of perfection, because sometimes condescending to the imperfections
of the infirm yet He would [still] extol the way of perfection, and He
would not damn the infirm paths of the imperfect; so Christ received
the person of the infirm in [receiving] a purse, and thus assuming in
not a few other things an weak human nature, just as is testified by
the Evangelical narrative, He condescended to the infirm not only in
the flesh but also in the mind, for He so assumed human nature that
being perfect in His works [and] made humble according to our [state],
He remained exalted in His own. And thus by the highest dignity of
charity one, who does not turn away from the highest rectitude of
perfection, is drawn to certain acts conformable to our imperfection.
For thus did Christ act and teach the works of perfection, He acted
even as one weak, just as is sometimes patent by [His] flight and [His]
purse; but being perfectly perfect in both so that He might show
Himself to perfect and imperfect as the way of salvation, that He had
come to save both, and that in turn He willed to die for [the sake] of
both.

8. Nor may anyone on account of these things erroneously assert that
those who abdicate property [over] all things according to God in such
a manner, bring about their own homicide or make themselves into
tempters of the living God: for thus they entrust themselves to Divine
providence in living so as not to contemn the way of human provisions,
but rather they sustain ]themselves] both on these things which are
offered freely or on those which are begged humbly or on those which
are acquired by laboring; which is the threefold means of living
provided for expressly in the rule. Indeed since according to the
promise of the Savior that the faith of the Church will never fail, as
a consequence neither will the works of mercy be taken from Her, on
account of which every reason for whatever diffidence seems to be taken
from the poor of Christ. And indeed where (which is not to be presumed
to any degree) these things might entirely fail, just as the way of
providing for the sustenance of nature, conceded by the law of heaven
in a case of extreme necessity to all those bound by extreme necessity,
may not be shut up either for others nor for the friars themselves,
since one is to be excused from every [positive] law on account of
extreme necessity. But such an abdication of property this does not
seem to lead to a renunciation of the use of things in every case for
anyone; for since in temporal things is to be considered the particular
property, possession, usufruct, jus utendi and simple usus facti, and
lastly as much as driven by necessity, the life of mortals may be able,
it is lawful to lack these things, in short there can be no profession,
which excludes the necessary use for sustenance of himself, truly was
he condescending by this profession, by which he has vowed on his own
to follow the poor Christ in such poverty, abdicating the dominion of
all things and being content with the necessary use of those things
conceded to himself.

9. Nor by this, that one seems to have abdicated the property, use, and
dominion of whatever thing, is one to be conjectured to have renounced
the simple use of everything, who says not the usus juris but the usus
facti in as much as having the name of "facti" it offers however in the
using no right to those [so] using, nay even of necessary things as
much as for the sustenance of life as for the execution of the duties
of one's state, except that which is subjoined below regarding money,
the moderate use according to their rule and all truth has been
conceded to the friars; which things the friars can licitly use, during
the license of the one conceding [them], and according to that which is
contained in the present arrangement [of this document]. Nor is it
discerned to resist these things that in human things civil providence
humanely prevails, namely that it is not possible for use or usufruct
to be separated from perpetual dominion; and lest the dominion of the
owner always be rendered useless by surrendering its use, the one
providing these things [should have] declared in [the act of] bestowing
[them] only a temporary use. Since the retention of the dominion of
such things, when by concession [their] use has been granted to the
poor, is not unprofitable to the owner since it is meritorious for
eternity and opportune to the profession of the poor, which as much as
it is judged more useful for himself, so much more that he exchange
temporal for eternal things. Next [whether or not] this was the
intention of the confessor of Christ in instituting the rule; nay
rather he wrote the contrary in it, he observed the contrary in living
[it]; since even he himself was for the necessity of using temporal
things and manifests in many places in the rule that such a use is
lawful for the friars: for he says in the rule that the clerics should
recite the divine office, for which the can have breviaries: from this
insinuating openly, that the friars would be having the use of [those]
breviaries and books, which might be opportune for the [recitation] of
the divine office; also in another chapter it is said that the
ministers and custodes for the necessities of the infirm and for the
clothing of the other friars may conduct a solicitous care by [means
of] spiritual friends according to places and seasons and cold regions,
as might seem to them to expedite necessity; even in another [place]
exhorting the friars to avoid idleness by means of a fitting exercise
of labor, he says, that they may receive for themselves and for their
brothers [those things] necessary for the body as the wage for [their]
labor; also in another chapter there is contained that the friars may
go about confidently for [11]alms. Even in the same rule it is had that
in the preaching, which the friars do, their speech be examined and
chaste for the utility and edification of the people by announcing to
them vices and virtues, punishment and glory. But this proves that this
supposes science; science requires study, the exercise of study truly
cannot be normally had without the use of books: from which it is
sufficiently clear to all [men] that from the rule the use of [those
things] necessary for food, clothing, the divine worship and study of
wisdom have been conceded to the friars.

10. And so it is reasonably patent to intelligent men from the
aforesaid things that the rule [is], as regards an abdication of this
kind, not only observable, possible, and licit, but meritorious and
perfect; and more meritorious since by it the professors of the same
are distanced greatly from temporal things for the sake of God, as has
been said. According to these things, since the friars themselves are
to acquire or be given nothing for themselves in particular, the
intention of the one conceding [them] is believed to have been truly
likewise, even if it was not expressed by the one offering, so that he
entirely concedes, bestows and offers, abdicates from himself, and
desires to transfer to others according to God the thing of this kind
which is offered, conceded or bestowed; nor is there a person, to which
in the place of God the dominion of a thing of this kind is fittingly
transferred, other than the aforementioned See or person of the Roman
Pontiff, the Vicar of Christ, who is the Father of all and nonetheless
the special Father of the friars Minor, lest the dominion of such
things seem to be uncertain, they may acquire the things offered,
conceded or bestowed on themselves, just as a son for [his] father in
his own way, the servant for [his] lord, and the monk for [his]
monastery; the property and dominion, of every utensil and book, and of
those moveable things present and future, which and of which it is
lawful for the order, or for the friars themselves to have the usus
facti, because it was also judged to have been made by Our predecessor,
Pope [12]Innocent IV, of happy memory, We, by [Our] apostolic
authority, receive as Our own and that of the Roman Church, and
sanction to fully and freely pertain to Ourselves and the same Church
by this present Constitution being valid in perpetuity.

11. Besides places purchased with various [13]alms and offered or
conceded to the friars under whatever form of words, it is right that
the friars should beware of themselves that in words of this kind there
not be used by other persons [formulas] incompatible with their own
state, whether by the possessors in common or by those holding certain
parts of the same place in which those possessing in common, or those
holding certain parts might keep nothing for themselves in an offering
or concession of this kind; similarly under Our law and dominion and
property and by the authority of the same aforesaid Church We receive
[all such places]. Truly let them inhabit places or houses, conceded in
their entirety or even offered by an individual or a college, if it
might happen that the friars inhabit such [places] by the will of the
one conferring [them], as shelter for the friars for as long as the
will of the one conferring [them] perdures; and that freely besides the
church and oratories attached to the church and the cemetery, which as
much now and future under Our law and property and in a similar manner
that of the aforesaid Roman church and under Our authority We receive,
[but] after a change in the will of the one conceding [the place(s)]
and when this becomes known to the friars themselves let them abandon
them. Of which places We retain completely nothing under Our dominion
or property or under that of the aforementioned Roman church, except
those things specially received by Our assent or by that of the same
Roman church; and if in these same places the one conceding might
reserve the dominion in [the act of] conceding them for the sake of
sheltering the friars, such dominion does not pass under the law of the
oft-quoted Church, but rather remains fully free for the one conceding.

12. Moreover they should have neither utensils nor other things, the
use of which [is had] from necessity and for the execution of the
duties of their state [in life], nor indeed the use of all things, as
has been said, to any [degree of] superfluity, riches, or abundance,
which would derogate poverty such as either a treasuring up [of such
things] or by such a spirit so that they might alienate [such things],
or sell [them], receive [them], either under the appearance of
providing for the future or by other occasions; nay even let [their]
abdication of all kinds of dominion and the necessity in [their] use
[of things] appear in all things [pertaining] to them. Let the
ministers and custodes together and individually in their
administrations and custodies dispose of these also with discretion
according to the exigency of persons and places, since concerning such
things sometimes the quality of persons, the variety of seasons, the
condition of places and not a few other circumstances more or less or
otherwise require to be provided for. Let them do those things however
so that holy poverty may always shine forth in them and in their deeds,
just as it is appointed them [to do] from their rule.

13. Moreover since it is prohibited under the stricture of precept in
the same rule that the friars not receive through themselves or through
others coins or money in any manner, and so that the friars may desire
to observe [this] in perpetuity and so that they may be obliged to
fulfill what was necessary to be enjoined [upon them], lest their
purity in the observance of this kind of precept be stained in any
thing or [lest] consciences of the friars be pricked by any goading
anguish, this very same article for the sake of rebutting more
profoundly those who are detracting it, which Our predecessors had done
taking it up, and pursuing the same by more clear determinations We say
first of all, let the friars themselves abstain from contracting debts
[mutua]; since for them to contract a debt, considering their state [in
life], is not lawful, nevertheless they themselves can, for making
satisfaction for their necessities, which might occur for a time when
[14]alms have ceased, concerning which it may not be able to be
satisfied conveniently at the time beyond promising a bond of some sort
of obligation, which by means of alms and other friends of the friars
they intend to work faithfully to repay this kind [of debt]. In which
case it is to be procured by the friars, that the one who will give
alms through himself or through another who is not to be nominated by
them, if it can be done, but by himself more according to his own
chosen pleasure, make satisfaction of this kind in entirety or in part,
just as the Lord will inspire him. If however he himself does not want
to do this or cannot, or his departure [from office] is imminent, or
because to those whom he wishes to commit [the matter], he has no
knowledge of their trustworthiness, or on account of whatever other
happening or cause, We declare and say that in no [way] is the purity
of the rule infringed nor is the observance of it stained in any manner
whatsoever, if the friars themselves care to make known to him [the
trustworthiness] of another or of others, or to nominate someone or
others or even to present him or them, to whom, if it pleases such to
give alms, the execution of the aforesaid things can be entrusted; and
let his approval of the below- written replacements be had:
nevertheless so that in the power of the one giving dominion, property
and possession of his own money with power free to recall the same
money to himself always up until its conversion into the deputed item
with those things fully, freely and integrally remaining, the friars
may have entirely no right to the money itself nor [may they have its]
administration or dispensation, nor may they themselves hold against
the person nominated or not nominated by them, in whatever condition he
might be, in court or outside it, a judicial prosecution or any other
right howsoever the aforesaid person [have conducted himself] in a
commission of this kind. Nevertheless it is lawful for the friars to
make known and specify and manifest their necessities to the aforesaid
person and to beg him to fulfill them. They can even exhort and induce
the same person to conduct himself faithfully in the matter committed
[to his care]; and to take care of the salvation of his soul in the
execution of the matter committed to himself, to this extent, that the
friars abstain entirely from all administration or dispensation of this
money and from [all] action or judicial prosecution, as has been said,
against the aforesaid person. If truly it might happen that a person of
this kind, nominated or not nominated by the friars, not be able to
execute through himself the aforesaid [matter] because of absence,
infirmity, free-will or distance of places, on account of which he
himself does not wish to present [himself], in those [places where] the
payment may be made or the satisfaction [of the debt] made, or to be
impeded for some other reason, it is lawful for the friars with a pure
conscience as much as to substitute one other person to the
aforementioned [matter] by nominating [him] and others, if they cannot,
or do not wish to have recourse to the first donor, since as just above
We have declared that it is lawful for them to so nominate such a
person. For when the aforesaid satisfaction is presumed to be able to
be expedited more swiftly, the agency by-way-of-substitution, as has
been said, is more commonly and more generally considered by the first
of the two persons to be [the one] able to suffice in the execution of
the aforesaid things. If however in the mean time because of the
distance of places, in which the satisfaction might be made and where
there emerges conditions or other circumstances in the case, in which
the agency of many substituted persons seems opportune, it is lawful
for the friars themselves in this case according to the character of
the business [and] with the aforesaid method observed to choose,
nominate, or present many persons to execute that agency. And since it
is right and expedient that for the necessities of the friars not only
for those for which there might have already been made a payment or a
satisfaction, as has just been said above, but even for those things
imminent, either violent necessities which they are able to expedite
for a short time, or such granted that [they be] comparatively few, the
provision for which [things] has been brought about by [something]
necessary, as in the writing of books, the construction of churches or
buildings for the use of their habitation, the repair of books and
clothes in remote places, and other things similar, if as they might
occur, [they are] to be soberly provided for with the above mentioned
regulation; so that We may distinguish clearly among those necessities,
We thus declare that in them the friars can proceed safely and with a
healthy conscience, namely, that in violent or imminent necessity,
which for a brief time or which sometimes from other circumstances not
so brief, as has been said above in the last case, it can be expedited,
as much as regards the one giving an alms as regards the one nominated
or substituted in all these, and for all these let it be conducted just
as in the article on making payment for past necessities [which] We
have declared just above. In that true necessity however much violent
at the present, which however from its quality, as has been said, has
been protracted for a time, because in this case it is true that then
by reason of the distance of places, which on account of the character
of the necessity itself would require traveling, then also by
considered reason of the circumstances of the same necessity there
would frequently befall cases, in which it would be right that the
money deputed for this kind of necessity would pass through diverse
hands and persons, for whom of all [these] persons it would be almost
impossible that there be a principle owner who deputes money for this
necessity or even one [who was] substituted by him, and third also by
the substituted one himself if such a case would happen, after the
substitute has received notice, We declare and say that in this article
besides those two methods explained regarding past necessities and
those violent which might be for a brief time, or sometimes not brief,
as is expressed above, to be expedited, as We have said before are to
be observed, to protect in every way the purity of the Rule itself and
its professors, that if there be at hand one giving out abundantly alms
of this kind or his nuncius, who is able to do this, to whom it is
expressly said beforehand by the friars that it would please themselves
that with the dominion of such money freely remaining in the possession
of him always, with the free power of recalling to himself the very
same money, even until its conversion into the thing deputed, as has
been said in the other two above cases, through however many hands or
persons, nominated by him or by the friars, the money or alms itself be
borne, the entire [matter] proceed with his consent, will and
authority, in order that by granting his assent to the aforementioned
things the friars can use safely the thing bough or acquired
by that money by whomsoever according to the manner described above.
However for a greater clarity [regarding] the aforesaid things We
declare the following be valid in perpetuity [regarding] the method of
providing [for such things], to the end that the friars by the
aforementioned means, as has been said, with those things being
observed regarding money to care for their past and violent
necessities, they are not to be understood nor can they be said to
receive money through themselves or an interposed person contrary to
the Rule, or to the purity of the profession of their order, since it
is patently manifest from the aforementioned things that the friars
themselves not only from reception, propriety, dominion or use of the
very money, but truly even from whatever handling of the same and [the
money itself] they be entirely prohibited.

14. Truly in this case when beforehand the money itself has been
exchanged in a licit transaction for something to have or use, it
customarily has happened that the money being conceded, if the one
conceding had said or expressed in the act of conceding that the
deputed might expend the same money for the necessary use of the
friars, whatever might happen to the one conceding [it] in life or at
death, whether the one conceding might relinquish an inheritance of
this kind or not, the friars have been able to have recourse to the
person deputed, not withstanding the death of the one conceding or a
contradiction of the inheritance, for that money [which was] to be
expended just as they had been able [to have recourse] to the owner
himself [who] conceded [it]. Because truly We are zealous for the
purity of the order itself with the intimate affection of the heart,
when in the aforesaid cases for the sake of a determined necessity, as
has been said, it has happened that money has been conceded for some
[purpose], the one conceding the money can himself be begged by the
friars, that if any [amount] of the money had for the determined
necessity would remain, that the one conceding [it] himself consent
that the remainder of the aforementioned money be exchanged into other
things for the other aforesaid necessities of the friars themselves; to
the end that [when] he does not consent to the aforesaid thing, the
remainder, if there was any, be restored to him. Let the friars beware,
however, that they solicitously agree amongst themselves so that they
do not knowingly consent [that there] be conceded to themselves more
[money] than in the semblance of the truth can be judged to be the
value of the necessary thing for which the money itself is conceded.
And since in the orderly exposition of the aforesaid things the giver
or recipient can easily err, so that more clearly for the utility of
the ones giving, for the purity of the order of [those] other simple
men, for the health of souls on this side and that more securely that
understanding be considered, which sufficiently in this case be
understood by a sane thinker and [so] We are elucidating [all this] in
the order of a constitution [that is] to have an eternal validity,
wishing [as We do] that it be brought to the attention of the public,
namely that always when money is sent or offered to the friars
themselves unless expressly by means of the one sending or offering
something be expressed, it is to be understood to have been offered and
send by the aforesaid means. For it does not have the semblance of
truth that someone would want to fix beforehand that means [concerning]
his [15]alms without expressing [it], by means of which even the donor
be defrauded of merit or those for whose necessities there be intended
by providing a gift of this kind be defrauded either of the effect of
[such] a gift or of the purity of their conscience.

15. Regarding these things, since sometimes not a few things are
assigned in diverse ways in last wills [and testaments] to the friars
themselves, nor are there expressly contained [anything] concerning
these things in the rule or the declarations of Our predecessors, lest
in these things doubting befall the legators in the future [when]
providing [for the friars], and [so] taking precautions for the
consciences of the friars We declare, ordain, and say that if the
testator expresses a manner according to which it would not be licit
for the friars, considering their condition, to receive [the grant], so
that if he might assign to the friars a vineyard or field for
cultivating, a house for leasing, or would mention similar words in
similar [cases] or would observe similar means in bequeathing [such
things], let the friars abstain by every means from such an grant and
its reception. If the testator truly has expressed a licit means in
assigning to the friars, as if he would say: "I assign money to be
expended for the necessities of the friars, or a house, field, vineyard
and similar things so that by [means of] a certain person or suitable
persons they be sold and the money accepted for these things be
exchanged for a building or other necessaries of the friars," or [if]
there are used similar means, or words, in assigning, in this case We
judge that quantity to be observed regarding the friars in all things
and by means of all things, [having] considered their necessities and
[in accord with] the aforesaid regimens, which has been declared by Us
above regarding the granting of monetary [16]alms. For the payment of
which things, having been assigned, let both the heirs of the testators
as well as the executors show themselves liberal, as prelates and even
seculars, to whom such a provision might pertain by law or custom,
since it will be expedient that they show themselves to have been
prompted from their office to fulfill the pious wills of those who are
needy. For even We intend to provide by means licit and congruous with
the rule of the friars so that the pious intention of deceased
[persons] be not thwarted, and [so that] the cupidity of the heirs may
be borne away with legitimate measures, and [so that] the poor friars
themselves be not defrauded of opportune assistance. If truly something
be assigned to the friars in a general manner without expressing the
means, in regard to this grant bequeathed so indeterminately We wish in
all things and by all things [that there] be understood and observed,
and in perpetuity by the present constitution we command, that which
above in [regard to] money or alms offered or sent to the friars [in
an] indeterminate [manner] We have wished and expressed to be observed,
namely so that in a licit manner it be understood to have been
bequeathed to the friars so that neither the legator of merit nor the
friars themselves of the effect of the bequest be defrauded.

16. Because truly the dominion of books and other movable [goods],
which both the order as well as the friars use, which however to not
belong to others, are worthy to pertain especially to the
aforementioned church, to whom it sometimes befalls [to have] books and
movable [goods] or for whom it is expedient to sell or even exchange
[such things], desiring to provide for the advantage of the friars and
for their consciences We concede by the same authority that the
exchange of such things and as regards them, the use of which it is
licit for the friars to have, proceed by the authority of minister
general and ministers provincial united or separately in their
administrations, for which [ends] We concede the arranging of the
disposition of the use of such things. If truly happens that a thing of
this think be sold at an price that has been estimated, since it is not
lawful for the friars to receive money through themselves or through
another [since] the rule prohibits [this], We ordain and wish that such
money or price be received and expended for a licit thing, whose use it
is licit for the friars to have, by a procurator deputed by the
aforementioned See or by the [17]cardinal entrusted with the governance
of this same order by the See itself according to the manner ordained
above regarding past and violent necessities. Concerning cheep or
movable [goods] or those equal in value that is lawful for the friars
from [this] present concession of Ours, having considered [their] piety
and devotion or for another honest and reasonable cause, [and] having
obtained the permission of their superiors about this beforehand,
according to that which will have been ordained among the friars in
general or provincial chapters both as regards cheep things themselves
or those equal in value, and the value of these, as well as the
aforementioned permission, that is by whom and how largess to others,
within and without the order, is to be managed.

17. It is lawful on the other hand that there be contained in the rule
that the friars have one tunic with a capuche and another without a
capuche, and [since] this can seem to have been the intention of [its]
institutor that [with] the cessation [of] necessity many habits are not
to be used, We declare that the friars can themselves be entrusted,
according to the permission of the ministers and custodes united or
separate in their administrations, when it will seem to them, having
pondered [their] necessities, and other circumstances, which seem
[should] be attended to according to God and the rule, to use more, nor
by [means of] this do they seem to deviate from the rule since even in
it there is said expressly that the ministers and custodes are to
exercise solicitous care of the necessities of the infirm and the
clothing of the friars according to places and times and frigid
regions.

18. And although the aforesaid rule contains that regarding the
clothing of the friars and the necessities of the infirm the ministers
as much as the custodes should exercise solicitous care, and that
saying binding the ministers and custodes tightly in this duty to the
extent that it seems at first glance to exclude others from it, because
however it is fitting that We consider solicitously both the time
[during which] the rule [was] instituted, when the friars themselves
were few in number in comparison to the present, and perhaps the
ministers and custodes seemed then to suffice to be able to procure
these [things], and nonetheless the extent of the multiplication of the
friars and the quality of modern times, nor does it have the semblance
of truth that blessed Francis the institutor of the rule either to have
wanted to fix beforehand a yoke of impossibility upon the ministers and
custodes or to want the friars themselves from the consequences of this
same impossibility to lack their necessities, We do concede that the
ministers and custodes themselves can exercise this manner of
solicitous care by [means of] another. Also other friars should even
diligently exercise care of this kind which is incumbent upon the
aforementioned ministers and custodes from the rule, when this has been
committed to them by these same [ones].

19. There is contained also in the rule that the friars, to whom the
Lord has given the grace of working, should work faithfully and
devotedly so that having excluded idleness, the enemy of the soul, they
may not extinguish the spirit of prayer and devotion. Since truly on
account of this passage some have sometimes striven to accuse the
friars themselves of idleness of life and of bold transgression of the
rule in this regard, We restraining monstrous verbal attacks of this
kind do declare that having considered the aforesaid words and the form
and manner of speaking, under which the friars are led to an exercise
of this kind, it does not seem to have been the intention of the
institutor that he would subject those spending time in study or the
divine offices and in the execution of ministries to manual labor or
work or might reduce them to this, when by the example of Christ and
that spiritual labor of many holy Fathers would so much outweigh him in
as much as they preferred those which are of the soul to those
corporal. Truly to those others, who do not exert themselves in the
aforesaid spiritual works (unless such be occupied in the licit
services of other friars) lest they live idly, We declare the aforesaid
words to be extended, unless such are both so excellent and notable in
contemplation and prayer that for the sake of this merit they are not
to be withdrawn from such good and pious an exercise. For the friars
[who] do not spend however much time in study or the divine offices,
but [rather] inheriting from the services of those spending time in
study or in other divine offices and ministries, since for their very
selves they merit to be sustained by those who serve, because it has
been established to have been sanctioned by that favorable law, by
which that vigorous fighter David justly decreed, namely that the
portion of those who descended into battle and of those who remained
among the baggage [train] was to be equal.

20. In truth because it is expressly contained in the rule that the
friars are not to preach in the diocese of any bishop, when they will
have been contradicted by him, in [regard to] this We, both deferring
to the rule and maintaining nevertheless the plenitude of Apostolic
authority, say that the aforesaid passage is to be observed to the
letter, just as it is set forth in the rule itself, unless there has
been conceded or ordained or [if] there be conceded in the future or
even ordained something through the Apostolic See concerning this
[matter] for the utility of the Christian people. And since in this
chapter of the rule there be immediately subjoined that no friar should
hardly dare to preach to the people, unless he will have been examined
and also approved by the minister general and there be conceded to him
by the latter the office of preaching, We, adverting to both the past
state of the order itself in its littleness and the modern in the
increased number of friars and the utility of souls, as is fitting,
concede that not only might the general look to examining, to approving
the friars to preach to the people and to conceding to them the
permission to preach, as far as the permission itself pertains to the
suitability of persons and the duty of preaching, just as is contained
in the rule, but also the ministers provincial can in provincial
chapters with the definitors [do] this, to the extent that it is said
to be observed even today and to be contained in the privileges of the
friars: that indeed the aforementioned ministers are able to revoke,
suspend, and abridge the permission, as and when it seems to them to be
expedient.

21. But since among our desires there is borne this that for the glory
of God the salvation of souls and the said order be promoted, by means
of which [desire] the affection for the Christian religion is
continually enkindled according to divine love, [and that] it be
increased in merit and number, We concede and by the present statute
establish that it be licit not only for the minister general but also
for the ministers provincial to receive among the friars persons
fleeing from the world, the permission of which ministers provincial by
[minister] general himself, as he will judge to be expedient, can be
abridged. Truly the vicars of the ministers provincial know that [the
granting of] this permission [is] forbidden themselves, unless by these
ministers, for whom We judge it is lawful to be able to commit this to
the vicars and to others, it be especially committed to the vicars
themselves. Let the ministers provincial themselves beware, however,
that they do not indiscreetly, nor indiscriminately, but [with] much
consideration commit this [permission to them], and thus let them
support those, to whom this [permission] happens to be committed, with
faithful counsels to the end that everything proceed discretely; nor
are they to admit all indifferently to the order but only those, who
having been recommended by learning, suitability or other
circumstances, can be useful to the order, and [who can] by the merit
of [such] a life advance themselves and by [their own] example assist
others.

22. Besides the friars of the aforesaid order doubting in regard to
that which is said in the rule, that with the decease of the minister
general there is to be an election of a successor by the ministers
provincial and custodes in the Pentecost chapter, whether it is fitting
that the multitude of all the custodes come together to the general
chapter, or whether, so that everything be managed with greater
tranquillity, it may be able to suffice that some from each province,
who would vote in the name of others, would take part, We give this
answer that namely the custodes of each province are to appoint one
from [among] themselves, whom they are to send with their minister
provincial on their own behalf to the chapter, committing their votes
and powers to the same, because, when they have appointed [him] by
themselves, even We reckon a statute of this kind to have been
approved, because also [Our] predecessor, Gregory IX, in a case of this
kind is said to have responded in this manner.

23. Finally sine there is contained in above mentioned rule that the
friars are not to enter monasteries of nuns except those [friars] to
whom special permission has been conceded by the aforesaid See,
although the friars have believed this to be understood more directly
regarding the monasteries of poor cloistered women religious, since the
aforementioned See has a special care for them, and the understanding
of this by [their] constitution at the time the rule was given, [when]
blessed Francis [was] still living, is believed to have been declared
by the ministers provincial in the general chapter, these same friars
nevertheless ask [Us] to make certain whether this regards all [women
religious] generally, since the rule excepts none, or whether it should
be understood only the monasteries of the aforesaid women religious. We
at least respond that generally this is to be prohibited regarding
whatever communities of women religious, and We wish that by the word
"monasteries" there be understood "cloisters," "houses," and "interior
quarters," for [the sake of] this that at other places where lay men
come together, the friars can there be present for the purpose of
preaching or seeking [18]alms, to whom it has been conceded by their
own superiors on account of their maturity and suitability, excepting
always [those places belonging to] the aforesaid cloistered
monasteries; at which none are given faculty to be present without
special permission of this same See: because also [Our] predecessor,
Gregory IX, himself regarding this case is said to have responded in
this manner.

24. Moreover Francis, the confessor of Christ, of holy memory, is said
to have commanded about the end of his life, the command of whom is
itself call the Testament: that the words of the rule itself are not to
be glossed, and as we read his words, to this extent and thus he should
be understood, let it not be said, adding that the friars are not to
seek in any manner other letters from the Apostolic See, and inserting
a certain something that they cannot observe without much difficulty,
on account of which the friars, hesitating whether they were bound to
the observance of the aforesaid Testament, sought this kind of doubt to
be removed from their consciences by the same predecessor, Gregory XI.
Who, as is told, attending to the danger of souls and [its]
difficulties, which could be incurred on account of it, to remove doubt
from their hearts told the friars that they were not held to the
observance of this command, because without the consensus of the friars
and more so of the ministers, all of whom it affects, it is unable to
oblige, neither did it oblige his successor in any manner, since as an
equal among equals he would not have [any] power [of commanding]. We
moreover reckon that nothing is to be innovated regarding the present
article.

25. Regarding these things We have understood that diverse letters have
come forth from not a few of Our predecessors, the Roman Pontiffs,
about the clarification of this rule and the rule itself and those
things touching [upon] it, but neither on this account has the insult
of the aforesaid attacks against the rule itself and [against] the
friars grown quiet, nor by [means of] these letters is provision made
for the state of the friars regarding many things, for which after the
occurrence of many cases, experience has indicated that there must be
provision for new and otherwise necessary things. We, therefore, lest
the diversity of letters of this kind and or the present constitution
or a difficulty of understanding in the observance of the aforesaid
things perturb the souls of the friars, and so that more fully,
clearly, and certainly it may respect the interests of their state and
the observance of the aforesaid rule; in each and every of its articles
which this very constitution contains, although these or others may be
contained in the other Apostolic letters above mentioned, We judge that
this Our constitution, declaration, or ordination is to be observed
exactly as such and inviolably by the friars themselves for all time.

26. Therefore since from the aforesaid things and others discussed by
Us in great detail it is manifest that the rule itself is licit, holy,
perfect and observable, [and] not evidently exposed to any criticism,
it and all Our above written statutes, ordinances, concessions,
arrangements, decrees, declarations and even supplements, by the
plenitude of Apostolic power We approve, confirm and will to exist in
perpetual validity, precepting in virtue of actual obedience that this
constitution, just the constitutions or decretals of other letters, be
read in the schools. And since under the appearance of [what is] licit
not a few in reading, expounding and glossing, can pour forth the venom
of their iniquity against the friars themselves and the rule, and
producing in diverse and adverse propositions according to their own
invention pervert the very understanding of this constitution, and
[since] the diversity of opinion and the distortion of understanding
can entangle the pious souls of many and steal the hearts of many from
entering religion, avoiding the perversity of such detractors urges us
to prevent them from doing the aforesaid things and to determine a
certain manner of proceeding for those who read this constitution.
Therefore under the pain of excommunication and of actual privation of
office and benefice We precept that the present constitution, when it
will happen to be read, as has been mentioned, be so faithfully
expounded to the letter, [that] no harmony, contrariety or diverse or
adverse opinions be introduced by the lectors or expositors, [that]
glosses not be made upon the constitution itself, unless perhaps the
word or sense of the word, or the construction or the constitution
itself, is expounded by them grammatically just according to the letter
or [to make it] more intelligible, nor is the understanding of the same
to be perverted by the reader into something else or distorted into
something other, than the letters themselves mean. And lest the
aforesaid See should labor further against detractors of this kind, We
precept strictly all [persons] and each [of them] of whatever
preeminence, condition or state, not to teach, write, criticize, preach
or speak perversely in public or private against the aforesaid rule and
the state of the aforesaid friars or against the aforementioned things
established, ordained, conceded, arranged, decreed, declared,
supplemented, approved and even confirmed by Us. But if anything
pertaining to some ambiguity in these [matters] would come forth, let
it be submitted to the summit of the aforesaid Apostolic See, so that
by Apostolic authority itself there may be manifested in regard to it
the intention [of him] to whom alone it has been conceded in these
[matters] to establish statutes and to clarify those things [which]
have been established. Let doctors above all or lectors, truly glossing
in [their] writings this constitution [in a manner] otherwise than
that, which We have explained, while they teach in public, [both] from
certain knowledge and deliberation, distorting the understanding of
this kind of constitution, [and] also commenting, producing writings or
booklets and making distinctions in the schools, [both] from certain
knowledge and deliberation, or preaching against the aforesaid or other
things or any [part] of the aforesaid things, not withstanding other
privileges or indulgences or Apostolic letters, conceded to whatever
persons of rank, individuals, orders, or houses religious or secular,
together or individually under whatever form or expression of words,
which We do not wish to be approved by anyone in the aforementioned
[matters] in whatever manner, [We say let them] know themselves to lie
under the sentence of excommunication, which We henceforth decree
against them; from which they cannot be absolved except by the Roman
Pontiff. Besides to such as these, against whom the sentence of
excommunication has been decreed by Us, [and] also to others, if there
will be any, coming into Our [presence] or that of the said See against
the aforementioned things or [against] anything [pertaining] to them,
We wish there be brought notice, that the rigor of the Apostolic
punishment drives them from these forbidden things, whom a foreseen
measure of equity would not hinder. To no man therefore is it licit at
all to infringe this page of our declaration, ordinance, concession,
arrangement, supplement, approbation, confirmation and constitution or
to contravene it with temerarious daring. If he should do so, let him
know that will incur the wrath of the Omnipotent God and of His holy
Apostles, Peter and Paul.

Given at Soriano, eighteen days before the Kalends of September, in the
second year of Our pontificate.

