____________________

[8]Pope Leo XII - Quod Hoc Ineunte - Proclaiming a Universal Jubilee, 24 May
1824

[9]anonymous 19th century painting of Pope Leo XII; swiped from
Wikimedia Commons To all the Christian Faithful, Who will see this
Present Letter; Greetings and Apostolic Benediction.

That which at the beginning of this century was grievously omitted
because of the evil condition of the times now at last is at hand
through the merciful intervention of God. We may now announce to you
with joy that it will proceed in accord with the happy custom and
institution of our ancestors. For that most auspicious year during
which pilgrims from all over the world come to Our city, the seat of
Saint Peter, is upon us. All the faithful are now summoned to pious
duties, and perfect aids to reconciliation and grace are offered for
the salvation of souls. We are happy to announce that an admirable
occasion has now been given us, after a lamentable series of evils, to
strive to renew all things in Christ by a salutary purification of the
entire Christian people. We have therefore decided to throw open that
heavenly treasure of the merits, sufferings, and virtues of Christ the
Lord, of his Virgin Mother and of all the saints, the treasure which
the Author of human salvation has entrusted to Us for distribution.
Indeed in this matter it is fitting that We esteem the infinite
efficacy of merit which Christ poured out over all the parts of His
mystical body. They in turn may be helped by mutual works and by the
salutary benefits of faith, which operates through charity. Thus by the
invaluable blood of the Lord and by the meritorious prayers of the
saints, the faithful may obtain the remission of that temporal
punishment which, as the fathers of Trent taught, is not always
entirely removed in the sacrament of penance (as it is by [10]baptism).

2. Therefore let the earth hear the words of Our mouth and the music of
the sacerdotal trumpet sounding the sacred jubilee to the people of
God, and may the whole world listen with joy. We announce that the year
of expiation and forgiveness, of redemption and grace, or remission and
indulgence has come, the year of renewal in Christ. The old law, a
harbinger of the future, had already set aside every fiftieth year
among the Jewish people. If indeed sold fields and the goods which had
fallen into the hands of others were then restored, we now receive back
through the infinite liberality of God the virtues, merits, and gifts
lost by sin. If the human law of servitude then ceased, now, with the
yoke of diabolical domination cast off, we are recalled into the
freedom of the sons of God, namely into that liberty which Christ
himself gave us. If, finally, by provision of that law debts were
cancelled, we are likewise absolved from the more serious debts of sin
and the punishments for them.

3. Eager therefore for these great blessings, in accordance with the
tradition of Our predecessors and with the consent of our Venerable
Brothers, the [11]Cardinals of the Roman Church, We publish and
promulgate a great and universal jubilee in this sacred city. It shall
begin with the first vespers of the coming vigil of the Nativity and
last through the whole year 1825, to further the glory of God, the
exaltation of the Catholic Church and the sanctification of all
Christian peoples. Now during the year of the jubilee, to fulfill the
requirements for a plenary indulgence, the Christian faithful must
repent, confess their sins, and receive holy communion. They must then
visit the basilicas of the blessed Peter and Paul, and also those of
Saint John Lateran and of Saint Mary Major, at least once a day for
thirty continuous or interpolated days, either natural or
ecclesiastical, counted from the first vespers of one day to the
evening twilight of the following day, if they live in Rome. If they
are pilgrims from outside the city, at least fifteen such days are
required. If they have poured out pious prayers to God for the
exaltation of the Church and the extirpation of heresies, for concord
among Catholic princes and the salvation of the Christian peoples, We
impart a complete indulgence, remission, and pardon of all their sins.

4. Some of those who begin the journey may be prevented by some
legitimate cause, such as illness or even death itself, from executing
the prescriptions and visiting the basilicas. If they are truly
penitent, have confessed, and have received holy communion, We desire
that they share in the indulgence and remission just as though they had
actually visited the basilicas on the days prescribed.

5. These things We announce to you with paternal affection, so that you
who labor and are burdened may hurry there where you know for certain
that you will be refreshed. It is hardly proper to be negligent in
seeking the salutary riches from the eternal treasury of divine grace
which now stands open, when such great zeal is spent to acquire earthly
riches, which worms consume and rust destroys. A vast and continuous
multitude of people of every class, even in past times, have streamed
to Rome, the center of the arts, from all over the world, despite the
dangers of the journey. It would be shameful and counter to the zeal
for eternal beauty if the uncertain fortunes of the journey or any
other similar reason were used as a pretext for not making the Roman
pilgrimage. The pilgrimage will compensate you many times over, even
for serious inconveniences. Indeed any sufferings you may incur will be
insignificant compared with the blessings of God which you will reap.
For you will reap the rich fruits of penitence, by which you may offer
to God the punishment of the body from unpleasant acts. By performing
the words prescribed by the law of indulgences, you may excel in
holiness, and by the accepted and constant will to overcome and drive
off sins, you will add this new aggregate of good works.

6. Come therefore to this holy Jerusalem, a priestly and royal city
which the sacred seat of Peter has made the capitol of the world. Truly
it rules more widely by divine religion than by earthly domination. As
Saint Charles was wont to say to his fellow citizens in exhorting them
to go to Rome during the holy year: This is a city whose ground and
walls, altars and churches, martyrs tombs and whatever the eyes can
see, impress on the soul something sacred. Those who, rightly prepared,
visit her hallowed places, know this. Just think how much visiting
these hallowed places enkindles faith and charity in the souls of the
spectators. What profit is gained from visualizing the thousands of
martyrs who sanctified this earth with their blood, from going to their
basilicas, from reading their inscriptions and venerating their relics!
Indeed, since the sky is so resplendent when illumined by the sun, what
then of the city of Rome whose two lights, Peter and Paul, illumine the
whole world? As Saint John Chrysostom often said: Who except one on
fire with the most intense devotion would dare to approach their
reliquaries and kneel at their graves, or to kiss the chains more
precious than gold or gems? Who, finally, could restrain his tears when
he sees the birthplace of Christ and recalls the infant Jesus crying in
the manger, or when he venerates the holy instruments of the passion of
the Lord and meditates on the crucifixion?

7. By a special divine favor these memorials of Our religion have been
assembled in this holy city alone. Surely they are a certain and
pleasing pledge of how God loves the gates of Sion above all other
tabernacles of Jacob. They invite all of you, Beloved Sons, to cast off
your hesitation and to ascend the mountain where it has pleased God to
dwell.

8. At this point we must remind all the citizens of Our city that the
eyes of the faithful from all over the world are upon them. Therefore
they should be restrained and moderate, as befits a Christian, so that
others may find in their conduct an example of modesty, innocence, and
virtue. May the visitors learn from this elect people to reverence the
Catholic Church and her authority, to obey her precepts, and to honor
ecclesiastical men and things. May due reverence for churches flourish
among the people of Rome, so that the pilgrims may find nothing which
suggests that worship and the place itself are despised, nothing which
offends good and chaste souls. May the visitors learn that the people
of Rome are present for divine services not only in body but also with
devoted affection of mind and heart. This We also urge for the
feastdays, lest these times instituted for performing sacred rites and
honoring God and the saints appear in this holy city to be devoted to
banquets and games, to disorderly activities, and lascivious license.
Finally whatever is true, whatever pure, whatever is just, whatever
holy, whatever is amiable, whatever of good repute, may these shine
forth in the Roman people, just as they received from their ancestors
the glory of faith and piety commended even by the apostle Paul as the
best of all possible inheritances. We rejoice that it is unstained and
illumined with the zeal and distinguished habits of the heirs.

9. We indeed are refreshed with this good hope, that everyone will
emulate the better gifts and that the sheep of the Lord will come
running as in battle array under the standard of charity to the embrace
of the pastor. Look about you, Jerusalem, and behold: your sons come
from afar, and your heart will wonder and rejoice....Would that their
sons would come prostrate to you, those who have humbled themselves,
and may all who take away your honor worship the footprints of your
feet! . . . We address all of you who are still removed from the true
Church and the road to salvation. In this universal rejoicing, one
thing is lacking: that having been called by the inspiration of the
Heavenly Spirit and having broken every devisive snare, you might
sincerely agree with the mother Church, outside of whose teachings
there is no salvation. We shall receive you happily with Our paternal
embrace and praise the God of all consolation, who will enrich us with
His mercies in the greatest triumph of Catholic truth.

10. Venerable Brothers, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and Bishops:
share in these cares and labors of Ours. Call an assembly, gather the
people so that your sons may be eager to receive those gifts which God
has entrusted to you for distribution to the chosen. Let them recall
that the days of our sojourn here are brief, and We do not know at what
hour the Father may come. We must therefore watch, carrying lighted
lamps filled with the oil of charity, so that when He does come, We may
run with eager love to meet him. You must also discuss carefully how
much efficacy there is in indulgences; how great is the fruit of
remission, not only of the canonical but also of the temporal
punishment due for sins; and finally, how much aid from the treasure of
merits from Christ and the saints may be applied to those who died
truly penitent before they had made adequate satisfaction for their
sins. Their souls must be purified in the fires of purgatory so that
entry into the eternal fatherland may open to them. Be alert here,
venerable brothers, for there are those who have followed a wisdom
which is not from God. Clothed in sheep's clothing, and pretending for
the most part a semblance of piety, they have spread falsehood among
the people. Now teach the flock what they have to do, what works of
piety and charity they must exercise, with what sorrow they are to
weigh themselves and their lives. Teach them to eliminate and correct
whatever may be defective in their habits, so that they may truly
benefit from this holy indulgence.

11. Furthermore, you must see that those of your flock who have decided
to make the pilgrimage may do so religiously, avoiding all the things
on their journey which could disturb their pious determination and lead
them to abandon their holy resolve. Rather may they follow eagerly and
constantly those things which kindle and inspire religion. If you are
free to come to this citadel of religion, you will add much splendor to
this celebration. You will obtain the greatest blessings of divine
mercies and, bringing them back as a rich reward, you will share them
to the pleasure and profit of the rest of your people.

12. We have no doubt that the Christian princes will aid Us in this
matter with all their authority, so that these plans for the salvation
of souls may attain their desired effect. We therefore exhort them to
second the efforts of their bishops and aid them in their labors. We
also ask them to prepare throughout their territories safe roads and
hostels for the pilgrims, lest any harm come to them in this pious
undertaking. The princes know what conspiracies have everywhere arisen
to weaken both the sacred and civil law in this holy matter. They also
know what wonders God has wrought, the God who has humiliated the
arrogance of the mighty with his right arm. May they continue to give
thanks to the victorious Lord of lords and with humble and frequent
prayer seek His aid. Let them pray that, although the iniquity of the
wicked and impious may still creep like a cancer, He may conclude the
work that He began. We thought of this when We first considered the
celebration of a jubilee. We know well what kind of sacrifice of praise
is offered to God by this unanimity of striving for celestial gifts. To
this same end therefore may the Christian princes also strain. Since
they are of a generous and exalted character, may they zealously
safeguard this most sacred undertaking. Furthermore, they will
recognize that they will really have done for their own authority
whatever they may have done for the safety of the sacred cause and for
the promotion of piety, so that when every seed of vice has been
killed, a happy harvest of virtues may grow strong.

13. So that all these things may happen, We ask your prayers to God. We
trust indeed that with common desires and entreaties you may ask for
the good of the Catholic faith, for the return to truth of those in
error, and for the happiness of the princes. Thus you will support Our
infirmity in bearing up under the duties of Our onerous office.

14. In order that this present letter may be more widely disseminated
among the faithful, We desire that even printed copies, signed by a
public notary and fortified with the seal of someone who has attained
ecclesiastical dignity, should be given the same full confidence which
this letter would itself arouse.

15. It is in no manner permitted anyone to infringe upon this page of
our indiction, promulgation, concession, exhortation, rogation, and
desire, or to go rashly against it. If anyone may have presumed to do
so, let him know that he will incur the indignation of the omnipotent
God and of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome, at Saint Peter's, on 24 May in the year of the
Incarnation 1824, in the first year of Our Pontificate.

