____________________

[8]Pope Innocent IV - Quae Honorem Conditoris Omnium - Whatever is for the
Honor of the Creator of All, 1 October 1247

[9]Pope Innocent IV To the prior and brother hermits of Mount Carmel.

Everything for the glory of the Creator and the benefit of souls merits
support in every way; especially those things in which it is known that
the apostolic see has shown particular interest.

Through our beloved son Hugh, [10]cardinal-[11]priest of Saint Sabina,
and our venerable brother William, [12]bishop of Antarados, we have
your request that certain dubious points of your rule be clarified and
corrected and that certain onerous obligations be compassionately
changed. All this is revealed in the letter which they (the revisors)
composed.

By apostolic authority we comply with Carmel's pius desires, confirming
the said clarifications, corrections and mitigations. These we support
by this present letter.

Further we include in verbatim form the revisors' answer to you
Carmelites, to wit:

Hugh, by mercy of God cardinal priest of Saint Sabina, and William, by
the same mercy bishop of Antarados offer salutation in him who is the
welfare of all his beloved sons in Christ - the religious prior general
and definitors of the general chapter of the Order of Brothers of
Carmel.

Clerics of your Order, Reginald and Peter, approached the apostolic see
and humbly requested the pope to clarify and correct certain points of
doubt contained in your privilege and change certain onerous elements
contained in the rule bestowed upon you by the late Albert, patriarch
of Jerusalem.

In response to your devout requests the pope entrusted to us the work
of making clarification, correction and mitigation in his name -
keeping in mind the best interests of your Order and the welfare of
your brothers. By the authority communicated to us we therefore command
your Order to receive devoutly and to observe dutifully the rule as
corrected, clarified and mitigated as it appeared to us appropriate.
Also (we command you) to correct other copies of your rule in accord
with this final draft which we forward to you under our seals through
your brothers.

The Text of Carmel's Mitigated Rule

Albert, called by God's favour to be patriarch of the church of
Jerusalem, bids health in the Lord and the blessing of the Holy Spirit
to his beloved sons in Christ, B. and the other hermits under obedience
to him, who live near the spring on Mount Carmel.

Many and varied are the ways in which our saintly forefathers laid down
how everyone, whatever his station or the kind of religious observance
he has chosen, should live a life of allegiance to Jesus Christ - how,
pure in heart and stout in conscience, he must be unswerving in the
service of his Master.

It is to me, however, that you have come for a rule of life in keeping
with your avowed purpose, a rule you may hold fast to henceforward; and
therefore:

Chapter I

The first thing I require is for you to have a prior, one of
yourselves, who is to be chosen for the office by common consent, or
that of the greater and maturer part of you.

Each of the others must promise him obedience - of which, once
promised, he must try to make his deeds the true reflection - and also
chastity and the renunciation of ownership.

Chapter II

If the prior and brothers see fit, you may have foundations in solitary
places, or where you are given a site that is suitable and convenient
for the observance proper to your Order.

Chapter III

Next, each one of you is to have a separate cell, situated as the lie
of the land you propose to occupy may dictate, and allotted by
disposition of the prior with the agreement of the other brothers, or
the more mature among them.

Chapter IV

However, you are to eat whatever may have been given you in a common
refectory, listening together meanwhile to a reading from Holy
Scripture where that can be done without difficulty.

Chapter V

None of the brothers is to occupy a cell other than that allotted to
him or to exchange cells with another, without leave or whoever is
prior at the time.

Chapter VI

The prior's cell should stand near the entrance to your property, so
that he may be the first to meet those who approach, and whatever has
to be done in consequence may all be carried out as he may decide and
order.

Chapter VII

Each one of you is to stay in his own cell or nearby, pondering the
Lord's law day and night and keeping watch at his prayers unless
attending to some other duty.

Chapter VIII

Those who know how to say the canonical hours with those in orders
should do so, in the way those holy forefathers of ours laid down, and
according to the Church's approved custom. Those who do not know the
hours must say twenty-five Our Fathers for the night office, except on
Sundays and solemnities when that number is to be doubled so that the
Our Father is said fifty times; the same prayer must be said seven
times in the morining in place of Lauds, and seven times too for each
of the other hours, except for Vespers when it must be said fifteen
times.

Chapter IX

None of the brothers must lay claim to anything as his own, but you are
to possess everything in common; and each is to receive from the prior
- that is from the brother he appoints for the purpose - whatever
benefits his age and needs.

You may have as many asses and mules as you need, however, and may keep
a certain amount of livestock or poultry.

Chapter X

An oratory should be built as conveniently as possible among the cells,
where, if it can be done without difficulty, you are to gather each
morning to hear Mass.

Chapter XI

On Sundays too, or other days if necessary, you should discuss matters
of discipline and your spiritual welfare; and on this occasion the
indiscretions and failings of the brothers, if any be found at fault,
should be lovingly corrected.

Chapter XII

You are to fast every day, except Sundays, from the feast of the
Exaltation of the Holy Cross until Easter Day, unless bodily sickness
or feebleness, or some other good reason, demand a dispensation from
the fast; for necessity overrides every law.

Chapter XIII

You are to abstain from meat, except as a remedy for sickness or
feebleness. But as, when you are on a journey, you more often than not
have to beg your way; outside your own houses you may eat foodstuffs
that have been cooked with meat, so as to avoid giving trouble to your
hosts. At sea, however, meat may be eaten.

Chapter XIV

Since man's life on earth is a time of trial, and all who would live
devotedly in Christ must undergo persecution, and the devil your foe is
on the prowl like a roaring lion looking for prey to devour, you must
use every care to clothe yourselves in God's armour so that you may be
ready to withstand the enemy's ambush. Your loins are to be girt with
chastity, your breast fortified by holy meditations, for, as Scripture
has it, holy meditation will save you. Put on holiness as your
breastplate, and it will enable you to love the Lord your God with all
your heart and soul and strength, and your neighbour as yourself. Faith
must be your shield on all occasions, and with it you will be able to
quench all the flaming missiles of the wicked one: there can be no
pleasing God without faith; [and the victory lies in this - your
faith]. On your head set the helmet of salvation, and so be sure of
deliverance by our only Saviour, who sets his own free from their sins.
The sword of the spirit, the word of God, must abound in your mouths
and hearts. Let all you do have the Lord's word for accompaniment.

Chapter XV

You must give yourselves to work of some kind, so that the devil may
always find you busy; no idleness on your part must give him a chance
to pierce the defences of your souls. In this respect you have both the
teaching and the example of Saint Paul the Apostle, into whose mouth
Christ put his own words. God made him preacher and teacher of faith
and truth to the nations: with him as your leader you cannot go astray.
We lived among you, he said, labouring and wary, toiling night and day
so as not to be a burden to any of you; not because we had no power to
do otherwise but so as to give you, in your own selves, an example you
might imitate. For the charge we gave you when we were with you was
this: that whoever is not willing to work should not be allowed to eat
either. For we have heard that there are certain restless idlers among
you. We charge people of this kind, and implore them in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that they earn their own bread by silent toil. This
is the way of holiness and goodness: see that you follow it.

Chapter XVI

The Apostle would have us keep silence, for in silence he tells us to
work. As the Prophet also makes known to us: Silence is the way to
foster holiness. Elsewhere he says: Your strength will lie in silence
and hope.

For this reason I lay down that you are to keep silence from after
Compline until after Prime the next day.

At other times, although you need not keep silence so strictly, be
careful not to indulge in a great deal of talk, for, as Scripture has
it - and experience teaches us no less - sin will not be wanting where
there is much talk, and he who is careless in speech will come to harm;
and elsewhere: The use of many words brings harm to the speaker's soul.
And our Lord says in the Gospel: Every rash word uttered will have to
be accounted for on judgement day. Make a balance then, each of you, to
weigh his words in; keep a tight rein on your mouths, lest you should
stumble and fall in speech, and your fall be irreparable and prove
mortal. Like the Prophet, watch your step lest your tongue give
offence, and employ every care in keeping silent, which is the way to
foster holiness.

Chapter XVII

You, brother B., and whoever may succeed you as prior, must always keep
in mind and put into practice what our Lord said in the Gospel: Whoever
has a mind to become a leader among you must make himself servant to
the rest, and whichever of you would be first must become your
bondsman.

Chapter XVIII

You, other brothers too, hold your prior in humble reverence, your
minds not on him but on Christ who has placed him over you, and who, to
those who rule the Churches, addressed the words: Whoever pays you heed
pays heed to me, and whoever treats you with dishonour dishonours me;
if you remain so minded you will not be found guilty of contempt, but
will merit life eternal as fit reward for your obedience.

Here then are the few points I have written down to provide you with a
standard of counduct to live up to; but our Lord, at his second coming
will reward anyone who does more than he is obliged to do. See that the
bounds of common sense are not exceeded, however, for common sense is
the guide of the virtues.

Given at Lyons, in the year of the Lord 1247, the fifth year of Pope
Innocent IV, on the first of September.

