____________________

[8]Pope John Paul II - Words to Society of Christian Doctrine, 9 May 2001

[9]Pope Saint John Paul II Dear Brothers and Sisters,

1. In the joy of Easter I make my own the words of the Risen Lord:
"Peace be with you! Il-paci maghkom! I thank you for your warm welcome.
It shows that the hospitality which once embraced the Apostle Paul (cf.
Acts 28:2) is still to be found in Malta. I am grateful for the
gracious words spoken on behalf of both branches of the Society by the
Superior General, who expressed all your love for the Church and for
the Successor of Peter.

2. The island of Malta is a rock rising from the sea, where the soil is
often thin and the sun harsh. Even this place where we are meeting
bears the name Blata l-Bajda, the "White Rock". Yet down the centuries
Malta has been extraordinarily generous and fertile in the deeper ways
of the Spirit. The unshakeable faith of the Maltese people has ensured
that this rock has been the good soil of which the Gospel speaks. In
this soil, Blessed Gorg Preca planted the Society of Christian
Doctrine, where it has flourished in the century of its life. Unlike
the fig-tree of the Gospel story which we have just heard (cf. Lk
13:6-9), you have produced fruit in abundance, and for that we give
glory to God and thank him here today.

Not only did Dun Gorg sow the seed; he tended the sapling and fed the
young tree so that it would grow strong and fruitful, as it has. You
have flourished because you have roots reaching deep into Christ, and
because you have been well nurtured by Dun Gorg's life of holiness.

To understand your vocation more deeply, consider the fig-tree. Its new
leaves are a sign that summer is at hand (cf. Lk 21:29-31); in the hot
season, its shade provides shelter from the sun; it gives abundant
sweet fruit as food; and Scripture says that its fruit has healing
power (cf. Is 38:21). This is an image of what you are called to be! As
catechists, you are to provide sweet nourishment for all who hunger for
God; you are to bring healing to those who are suffering for lack of
light and love. If you do these things, you will truly be a sign of the
springtime which the Holy Spirit is now preparing for the Church.

3. Wherever Dun Gorg went to preach he was followed by crowds of
people. They were captivated by his words. Why? It was because they
recognized in the preaching of Dun Gorg the voice of Jesus himself. It
was the Lord to whom they were listening; they were drawn by the
irresistible attractiveness of Christ who alone, they knew, could
satisfy the deepest longing of their hearts. The beauty of holiness
which is found supremely in Jesus and is reflected in today's new
Beatus will never fail to draw the human heart. It is certain that if
we can show forth the face of the Risen Lord to the world then we shall
touch and win souls in ways that will be surprising!

4. It is in the depths of contemplation that we discover "the glory of
God which is in the face of Christ" (2 Cor 4:6). That is why your rule
of life urges you to pray often and to meet regularly with your
spiritual director, who serves as guide and companion on the path of
your fidelity. To contemplate the face of Christ is to be filled with
spiritual energy for the mission entrusted to you. Like Saint Paul,
from contemplation you are called to go forth as missionaries: not just
as teachers but as witnesses who can speak with power because you can
say, like the first disciples: "We have seen the Lord!" (Jn 20:25). It
was Pope Paul VI who wrote that "the people of our day are more
impressed by witnesses than by teachers, and if they listen to these it
is because they also bear witness" (Evangelii Nuntiandi, 41). This was
true of Dun Gorg in a wonderful way, and it must also be true of you,
his spiritual children.

In his Letter to the Galatians, Saint Paul writes that God "was pleased
to reveal his Son in me, in order that I might preach him among the
Gentiles" (1:16). He does not speak of Christ revealed "to me" but of
Christ revealed "in me". Once Jesus reveals himself to Saul on the road
to Damascus, and once Paul opens his heart to receive the gift, the
Apostle himself then becomes the revelation. He is filled with Christ,
so that he can say in the same Letter: "It is no longer I who live, but
Christ who lives in me" (2:20). His whole life, all that he does, says
and thinks, his body, mind, heart and soul, become the revelation of
Jesus to the world. This is the mystery of the sublime vocation given
not just to Saint Paul and Blessed Gorg Preca, but to each of you as
well.

5. Your founder was especially devoted to the words: Verbum Dei caro
factum est; based on the Prologue of Saint John's Gospel: "The Word was
made flesh" (1:14). Here in fact is the foundation of your vocation and
apostolate. The Divine Word in a certain sense continually takes flesh
in his Mystical Body, the Church. You are to help in this by doing for
others what Dun Gorg has done for you. You are to plant the seed of
God's word in people's hearts, so that Christ may live in them! You
must teach everyone -- children, young people, adults -- to contemplate
the face of Christ, to see the Lord (cf. Novo Millennio Ineunte, 16),
so that the light of God's glory which shines from the face of Jesus
may shine forth from them as well. This is the "rooting of the Church
in time and place [which] mirrors the movement of the Incarnation
itself" (ibid. 3).

As you set forth and continue this sacred mission, let the words of
your founder echo ceaselessly in your hearts: MUSEUM -- Magister,
utinam sequatur Evangelium universus mundus! Divine Teacher, may the
whole world follow the Gospel! Entrusting you to the intercession of
the Virgin Mary, Saint Paul and Blessed Gorg Preca, as well as Blessed
Ignatius and Blessed Adeodata also beatified today, I impart my
Apostolic Blessing to all the members of the Society of Christian
Doctrine as a pledge of endless mercy in Jesus Christ, "the faithful
witness and firstborn from the dead" (Rev 1:5). Il-paci maghkom!

