____________________

[8]Quanta Cura - Forbidding Traffic in Alms, by Pope Benedict XIV, 30 June
1741

[9]Pope Benedict XIV To the Venerable Brothers, the Primates, the
Metropolitans, the Archbishops, and all the Bishops who are in
Communion with the Holy See. Venerable Brothers, Greetings and
Apostolic Benediction.

There is no Catholic who does not know the care required to ensure that
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass is not only celebrated with due
reverence and veneration, but also that all semblance of payment of any
kind is removed from the dignity of such a sacrifice: both the base
demand - rather than request - for [10]alms and other similar practices
which are not far removed from the sin of simony or at least from
dishonest profit.

It is true that the avarice - which is the bondage of idolatry - of
many clerics and laymen has already progressed to the point that they
collect [11]alms or stipends for the celebration of the Mass. These
have been prescribed by local customs or sanctions of the diocesan
synods for the maintenance of the priests. They then take this money
and have the Mass celebrated elsewhere, where the [12]alms or stipends
given for each Mass are lower than would be given there where the fee
was received.

2. Everyone clearly understands how foreign this is to the expressed or
silent desire of those who give [13]alms piously. Nor is it to be
judged otherwise. Everyone desires that the Masses be celebrated in the
church upon which he bestowed [14]alms or in which he is buried, rather
than in another church, which may be unfamiliar to him. Such
frustration of the intentions of the faithful is motivated by the
desire for base profit, just as is the case in the conduct of trade.
Accordingly, it is not immune to the suspicion of avarice and vice,
even of theft, whence it may be subject to restitution. Thus many good
people, gravely offended by the news of such business, abstain from
offering more [15]alms for the celebration of Masses.

3. The Roman Pontiffs, Our predecessors, detested this lethal abuse
which gradually insinuated itself. For this reason they wanted a decree
both from the Congregation of the [16]Cardinals of the Universal
Inquisition of the Holy Roman Church and from the Congregation of the
[17]Cardinals Interpreters of the Council of Trent against the
heretical depravity. This decree stated that if a priest received a
stipend or [18]alms of a certain value for the celebration of the Mass,
a lesser fee must not be paid to another priest for celebrating such a
Mass. This holds even if the first priest were to inform the second
that he had received a stipend or [19]alms of greater value, and the
second priest were willing to accept the lower fee.

4. For this reason, Venerable Brothers, We ask and exhort you who share
Our concerns and are associated with Us in the apostolic ministry to
keep watch over your flocks. Exert yourselves so that this disease may
spread no further, but rather may be entirely eradicated. Avarice is
the root of all evil. Some people who chased after it have strayed from
the faith and have brought upon themselves many sorrows. There is no
greater pestilence than avarice, which corrupts the opinion of priestly
dignity and perfection and casts it out. Avarice, which teaches people
to esteem God less than riches and to serve Mammon, causes the greedy
to lose their inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. If this
can hardly be tolerated among laymen and should be restrained by law,
what about churchmen who have sent forth this message in earthly
matters, who have been called to share the work of the Lord, and who
have delivered themselves up to the Lord? What about those who, with
contempt for holy laws and with disdain for the priestly character, are
led astray into avarice, not through worldly profits, but through the
ministry of the altar? Strive therefore, Venerable Brothers, to whom
the care of Christ's flock is entrusted, not only to shine forth in
word and example so that you may be an ambassador of Christ in every
place and the people may follow in your footsteps, but also to teach
both the clergy and the laity to shun pastures poisoned with vice and
to run to the heavenly fold.

5. Since by the fear of present punishment there may be readier
compliance with salutary warnings, make the following pronouncement
known in all your dioceses. If anyone collects [20]alms or stipends for
the celebration of the Mass at the level which the customs of the place
or synodical statutes demand and keeps part of this fee for himself,
causing the Mass to be celebrated either there or elsewhere where lower
fees are paid for celebrating Masses, he will be punished. A lay person
who does this will automatically incur the penalty of excommunication
in addition to the other penalties which you might invoke according to
your decision. The cleric will automatically incur the penalty of
suspension, from which no one can absolve except Ourselves or the Roman
Pontiff ruling at the time, unless there is danger of death. We trust
in the Lord that each one, mindful of his condition, wilt not belittle
such salutary laws and ecclesiastical censures. Meanwhile, We lovingly
impart Our apostolic blessing on your brotherhood and on the people
entrusted to your care.

6. We also wish that the same confidence be placed in copies of this
letter - even printed ones - which are signed by a notary public and
guaranteed by the seal of an ecclesiastical official, as would be
placed in the original letter if it were displayed or shown.

Given in Rome at Saint Mary Major under the ring of the fisherman on
the thirtieth day of June in the year 1741, the first year of Our
pontificate.

