____________________

[8]Pope Sixtus V - Triumphantis Hierusalem - Triumphant Jerusalem, 1588

[9]Pope Sixtus V Triumphant Jerusalem's sempiternal glory and the never
withering crowns of the Saints, most happily reigning with Christ Holy
Mother Church admiring these with joy, militant upon this earth, truly
hastening to the same crown of justice, does not cease to preach that
God is wonderful in His Saints. Nor truly do they alone celebrate with
exceptional praises the distinguished victories and the very bright
merits of the Saints, but the same Saints, whom God wonderfully honors,
She Herself also piously venerates and cares for, established (as She
is) upon their preaching and salutary docrine, founded upon their
blood, instructed by their illustrious works of charity and their
example, She is helped each day by their fervent prayers before God.
Wherefore She greatly studies those things due to that celestial
Hierarchy, where all are ordered in perfect charity, to conform Herself
to that norm and image, indeed in as much as She is allowed in the
exile of this passing world. For just as there are many mansions in
that great house of the greatest Head of a household, heaping with all
good things, and just as those blessed souls enjoy a certain wonderful
variegated beatitude of one glory, so the Catholic Church, which is the
effigy of that one celestial, arranged (as She is) as a battleline in a
military camp, (and) having been illumined by a divine light,
acknowleges and distinguishes those sacred orders in the veneration
that must be exhibited to the Saints of God. And so while She praises
the glorious chorus of Apostles, the laudible number of Prophets, the
army of strongest Martyrs and offers honors to the other Saints in
their place and order with due ceremony, in one spirit of charity and
in a similar pious affection of devotion does She exult manifoldly.
Truly among those most blessed choirs of Saints, whose memory is
celebrated by all the faithful with a merited religious cult, there
shines forth in distinguished splendor the order of holy Doctors
eloquently ennumerated by Paul the Apostle, when he said, "And He gave
some indeed as Apostles, others however as Prophets, others truly as
Evangelists, others however as Pastors and Doctors," whom He
constituted vigorous and faithful cultivators and workers in His
vinyeard, "for the work of ministry, for the edification of the Body of
Christ." (1 Cor. 12:28; Eph. 4:12) These are those, concerning whom
divine Wisdom shouts: "They who make Me shine forth will have eternal
life." (Eccli. 24:31). Concerning these the Angel spoke in the presence
of Daniel: "Moreover they who are learned, will shine like the splendor
of the firmament, and they who train many unto justice, will be as
stars for perpetual eternities" (Dan. 12:13) Finally these the Savior
Himself, Christ the Lord, decorates with that distinguishing eulogy:
"He who does these things and teaches them, will be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven." (Mt. 5:19) Since however at all times the study and
doctrine of the sacred Doctors has been useful and salutary in the
Church of God, this fact itself demonstrates that it is greatly
fruitful and planely necessary, when, with the furor of the horibile
name of christian persecutors repressed, in the very peace of the
Church there were roused up more vehemently the wars of heresy. For
then the traps and fallacies of the heretics, who, with the devil
instigating, did not discontinue to overseed tares in the field of the
Lord, by the care and diligence of the Doctors in detecting, both the
pestiferous and detestible errores were cut off by the sword of the
spirit, and with the holy Doctors as attendants, the falsehood was
layed low by the strength of catholic truth. Wherefore by every right
are the holy Doctors designated in the Church with the name of the
stars Hyades, who, in the very frigid winter and with the long nights
of infidelity completed and the storm of persecution calmed, they then
shone more brightly upon holy Church, after the sun of truth grew warm
among the hearts of the faithful, and as the year opened truly more
lucidly with new faith.

1. Truly already among these, whom the great Lord willed to fill with a
spirit of intelligence, and whom each one has sent forth the utterance
of his wisdom like a shower upon the Church of God, is Saint
Bonaventure numbered, as a Confessor, a Pontiff, and a exceptional
Doctor in the same Catholic Church, he whom Our predecessor, Pope
Sixtus IV, of happy remembrance, on account of the admirable sanctity
of his life and very excellent doctrine inscribed among the number of
the Saints.

2. For having been born at Bagnoregio in [10]Tuscany, so that he might
satisfy the pious vow of his mother, he entered as an adolescent into
the Religion of Saint Francis, by means of whose still recent footsteps
the new soldier of Christ progressing humbly and constantly, drank the
most healthful observance of regular norms with such ardor of spirit
and avidity of heart, that there appeard in him the highest sanctity,
and with innocence and chastity of life, holy humility, patience,
meekness, disdain of earthly things, desire for those heavenly, he was
an example to and the admiration of all. Inflammed in such great
sweetness and fervor of divine love, his spirit was so rapt in God,
that already as one introduced into the wine cellar of the Spouse and
drunk with the best wine of charity, he seemed to gaze everywhere upon
Jesus Christ Crucified and Suffering, and to dwell in His wounds. Truly
to this exceptional holiness of life did this man of God join the great
praise of outstanding doctrine, with God so disposing, so that for His
glory and the utility of the Church, he would not only make very great
progress in example, but in word and erudition. And so when in the
study of the Sacred Letters, the reading of the holy Fathers and in the
very necessary disicipline of scholastic theology, having been employed
most diligently by Alexander of Hales, the distinguished theologian of
that era, for a brief space of time, with the goodness of surpassing
genius, by assiduous labor, and what is chief of all, with the grace of
the Holy Spirit, who molded him on all sides as a golden vessel for a
chosen honor, he made such progress and arrived at such perfection of
doctrine, that decorated in solemn custom with the distinctions of a
Master in Theology in the frequented lecture hall of Paris, he taught
sacred theology publicly in the same place.

3. Truly did he attain such great praise in the gift of interpreting
and in the science of all theology, that the most learned men admired
his doctrine and erudition. And indeed there are extant many, moving
and very bright writings of this holy man, which still are of great
utility to the Church and are not mediocre, by the benifice of God,
everyone of which both erudite men, of Our age and ages past, have read
with much fruit and very entirely approved, so great was he in
theology, that they delcare him sufficient. For he left those monuments
of his divine genius to those who would come after him, by which
questions, very difficult and involuted with many obscurities, are
explained methodically and in order, straightforwardly and lucidly,
with a great bounty of the best arguments, the truth of the Catholic
Faith is illustrated, pernicious errors and profane heresies are
overthrown, and the pious minds of the faithful are admirably inflammed
to the love of God and the desire of the celestial fatherland. For
there was in Saint Bonaventure something preeminent and unique, so that
he stood out not only in subtlety of arguing, in facility of teaching,
in cleverness of defining, but he excelled in a certain divine strength
of thoroughly stirring up souls. For in writing with the greatest
erudition he so conjoined an equal ardor of piety, that he would move
the reader by teaching and it would sink into the recesses of the soul,
and then he would prick the heart with certain seraphic stings and it
would pour forth with a wonderful sweetness of devotion; admiring which
grace poured out upon his mouth and pen, Our precedessor the Pontiff
Sixtus IV, had no doubts in saying, that the Holy Spirit seemed to have
spoken in him.

4. When therefore to the faithful servant so many and very bright
talents have been entrusted by the Lord, that he increases these by
exercising them for the utility of his brothers and by buying the
treasures of heavenly grace, by divine counsel and with the greatest
consent of his whole Order he was made, at Rome, the seventh Minister
General after blessed Francis; in which duty of office he not only
exhibited prudence, vigilence, and sollicitude, but he burned up with
such ardor of fraternal charity and slaved for his brothers with such a
self-abasement (demissio) of christian humility, that there was
acknowledged in him that saying of the Lord: "Let him who is greater
among you, be as your servant." (Mt. 20:26)

5. Rather even Our Predecessor of pious memory, Pope Clement IV, who
loved this holy man intensively and was delighted by his wonderful
doctrine, obtained for him the distinguished Archepiscopate of York, so
that so excellening in virtue and prudence he might run about in a
broader field for the utility of the many. He truly, since he could not
suffer to tear himself from the embrace of seraphic poverty, modestly
and humbly, refused the offered dignity.

6. Moreover when Gregory X, the Supreme Pontiff, on account of the most
grave situation of the Christian republic had proclaimed the General
Council of Lyons, and searched eagerly for men outstanding in sanctity,
doctrine and wisdom, whose strong and faithful works he would use for
managing and arranging of this greatest matter, he chose first of all
two of the clearest lights of that age from the two most flourishing
Orders, of Preachers and of Minors, Saints Thomas and Bonaventure, whom
he commanded to come in person. But when the other had fallen sick on
his journey and had happily flown forth to the crown of glory, Saint
Bonaventure, having arrived at Lyons, was greeted most curteously by
the Roman Pontiff, Gregory, who used to repose thus in his virtue and
wisdom, to determine properly the parts of directing and administering
the Council to be assigned especially to him. For which reason from the
public utility and necessity of the Church, so that he would not only
take part in the things of the Council, but preside over them, he
decided to place the burning and shining light upon the highest
candlestick, so that it would greatly brighten the house of God.

7. And so he immediately elected Saint Bonaventure seeking no honors,
but rather fleeing them, and indeed submitting to the Vicar of Christ
and not refusing to undertake any labors for the Church just as in a
theatre of the whole world he had (already) elected him to the Sacred
College of [11]Cardinals and to the order of Bishops; for he appointed
him to the Church of Alba, the honor of which was accustomed to be
given to the older [12]Cardinal presbyters.

He, who bore the fullest dignity, contributed at once to the glory of
God and to utility of the Church. For indeed in the most ardous matters
of the Council he performed the most uncommon tasks, defended the
Catholic Faith most constantly, refuted depraved opinions most sharply,
and by whose patience, doctrine, sanctity, and orations, the pastoral
sollicitude of the Pontiff Gregory was so greatly aided, that with the
disagreement of the schismatics removed by the mercy of God, Michael
Palaeologus, the Emperor of the Greeks, and the oriental nations
returned to the obedience, unity, and communion of the Apostolic See;
and at last it was worthy to have him, whom in Greek they call
Eutychius.

8. Therefore deservedly, when a little before in the same Council the
strongest athlete of Christ had migrated forth from the pilgrimage of
this life to the celestial fatherland, all grieved over his death, all
deplored the common loss, all decorated his burial with tears and
praises, but one before all others most truly celebrated the most holy
man's life conducted most uprightly his most proven morals, his very
many labors undertaken for the Church, and his doctrine, esteemed in
that Council itself with distinguished praise. This man was Peter,
[13]Cardinal of Tarantasia, of pious memory, a man outstanding in
erudition and christian eloquence, who afterwards when raised up to the
high rank of the pontificate, was named Pope Innocent V. Truly did the
Supreme Pontiff Gregory X, himself, having lost a brother in the
deepest affection of heart, greiving for his most faithful helper and
counselor, testify openly with graver words, that the Catholic Church,
which had received from the piety and doctrine of such a man the
richest fruits, had lost greatly at his death. But truly has it been
said by the Holy Spirit: "In eternal remembrance will be the just man."
(Ps. 111: 6) For he who in life was illustrious, was long after death
made more illustrious, with God, who is admirable and glorious in His
Saints, much approving him with very many signs and prodiges and with
the greastest distinguishing miracles.

9. When the fame of whose miracles had gathered great strength among
all men, the same Sixtus, Our predecessor, surveying them from the
sublime watchtower of the Apostolic See, understood that the finger of
the God, who alone works great wonders, was planely there. And so both
on his own, and at the very many vehement requests of Frederick,
Emperor of the Romans, of good memory, of kings, republics, dukes and
cities, and the urgent demanding consent of nearly all the faithful,
the Roman Pontiff had the worthy idea of registering that most
outstanding man, the [14]Cardinal Bishop, Bonaventure, among the
Saints. Therefore with the greatest care and having examined both the
exceptional sanctity of that diligent life and the truth of his
miracles and having gathered these together, at last with all things,
which pertained to this matter, duely and rightly accomplished, for the
glory of God and the exaltation of the Catholic Church, in virtue of
his own power and that bestowed upon him by God in blessed Peter the
Apostle, he registered among the Saints the same blessed Bonaventure,
with the consent of his brothers, the [15]Cardinals of the Holy Roman
Church, and all the prelates, and he inscribed and aggregated him among
the number of the Saintly Confessors, Pontiffs, and Doctors, and he
commanded that his anniverary feast day be celebrated on the second
Sunday of the month of July, and that an office be recited for him,
just as for a Confessor, Pontiff, and Doctor throughout the universal
Church, likewise with other decrees added, which are more fully
contained in the letters of the same Sixtus.

10. And although this Doctor, Saint Bonaventure, be glorious and most
celebrated in the Catholic Church, and be greatly respendant in Heaven,
where he is crowned with that crown, which God witholds for those who
love Him, and although no human thing is lacking to him, who enjoys the
good things with Christ, which neither the eye sees, nor the heart
expects; nevertheless the charity of Christ and a burning affection of
a certain devotion, by which for him We have been perpetually consumed
from nearly Our first years, urges Us to consider how to rather
propagate and explain his sanctity and to a greater extent his
doctrine, as much as We are able with the help of the Lord. Indeed We
are moved, that there is a part, of Our seraphic Relgion, in holy
communion with him, in which We have been educated and versed for many
years, and for whom as a for a most worthy mother, We should manifest
every honor of piety and gratitude of heart; but much more do the glory
of God, the pastoral office which We bear, the so many labors
undertaken by this most holy man on behalf of the Church of God, and
his so many illustrious merits urge Us, so conjoined as they are with
the Roman Church, in whose broadest ranks and Senate he sat with the
highest praise. Finally the utility of the universal Church moves Us,
which can be always more and more richly captivated by the erudition of
such a Doctor, especially when the ambushes and the diabolical
machinations of heretics, by which they oppose most vehemently in this
sad age that sacred theology, which is called Scholastic, admonish Us
greatly, that We should retain, explain, and propagate this same
theology, as something which nothing can be more fruitful for the
Church of God. For with the divine gift of Him, who alone gives the
spirit of knowledge (scientia) and wisdom and understanding, and who
furnishes His Church throughout the lifetimes of generations, as is
needed, with new benifits, and who provides Her with new supports,
there has been discovered by Our ancestors, most wise men, Scholastic
theology, which by two Doctors glorious above all, the angelic Saint
Thomas, and the seraphic Saint Bonaventure, the most brilliant
professors in this capacity, and first among those, who have been
registered among the number of the Saints, with excellent genius,
assiduous study, great labors and vigils have refined and decorated it,
and have passed it on, to those who would come after, optimally
arranged and in many ways very clearly explained. And indeed such a
salutary understanding and practice of this science, which spread
abroad from the richest sources of divine letters, Roman Pontiffs, holy
Fathers and Councils, could certainly always bring the greatest
assistance to the Church, either to understand and interpret, truly and
sensibly, the Scriptures themselves, or to read through and explain the
Fathers more securely and usefully, or to detect and refute the various
errors and heresies. Truly in these last days, in which already there
has come those dangerous times described by the Apostle, and the
blasphemous, proud, seductive men who advance to what is worse still,
erring and sending others into error, this (kind of theology) is
necessary to sensibly confirm the dogmas of the Catholic Faith and
confute heresies. And the state of affairs is such, that the judges are
the very enemies themselves of the truth, by whom Scholastic theology
has become dreadful to the greatest degree, who scarcely understand, by
that apt and inner connected coherence of things and causes, in that
order and arrangment, as by the training of soldiers in fighting, with
those lucid definitions and distinctions, by that firmness of arguments
and the sharpest disputations, that light is distinguished from
shadows, and the true from the false, and their mendacity, involuted
with many deceptions and fallacies, like a vestment borne away, is
brought to light and stripped bare. In as much as therefore as these
men begin to fight and overturn this most fortified citadel of
Scholastic theology, so much more does it befit us to defend this
unconquered defense of the Faith, and both to conserve and keep safe
the inheritance of Our fathers, and to embellish, as much as we can,
the keenest defenders of the truth with merited honors.

11. Wherefore, so that the erudition of the Seraphic Doctor may be
diffused more broadly to the utility of the many, and so that from his
books and works erudite and studious men may daily sieze more copious
and more tastety fruit (which must not be doubted will add to the glory
of this very Saint, though he is most blessed in heaven) We establish
that indeed at first in Our kind City, in this basilica of the Twelve
Holy Apostles, a college by the name of Saint Bonaventure, in which
sacred theology especially from the works and commentaries of this
exceptional and devout Doctor is to be publicly explained.

12. Then also all his works, which can be found, whose editions are
partly not yet carefully sought out nor even altogether evaluated under
our authority, and partly already published, We are paying attention at
the same time to them all in proper form, so that both what is most
faultless be printed and that these be brough to light from Our Vatican
press. However because from the very beginning of Our pontificate, with
God, as We piously believe, inspiring, We have proposed constantly, to
celebrate the name and merits of this holy Doctor among and for the
sake of all men and to increase and amplify the faithful's veneration
of him, and We have also been sensibly and not moderately stirred to do
this by the example of Our predecessor, Pope Pius V, of holy memory,
most worthy of the Christian republic, and whom as a father We still
revere and honor.

13. For he having been throroughly moved with religious piety and
singular devotion, by which he was influenced in Saint Thomas of
Aquinas' regard, the honor of his Order and the ornament of the
Catholic Church, desiring in the same manner to addorn the same Saint
with suitable honors on account of his most outstanding merits in the
Catholic Church, besides these ordered and decreed this, that his feast
day be forever celebrated each year as a rite of double office
according to the likeness of the four holy Doctors of the Church; which
equal honor We indeed estimate should be alloted to Saint Bonaventure,
an exceptional Doctor, since among these such a fine conjuction and
similitude of virtues, holiness, doctrine, and merits intervenes. For
these "are the two olive trees and two candlesticks" (Apoc. 11: 4)
lighting the house of God, who both with the fat of charity and the
light of science entirely illumine the whole Church; these two by the
singular providence of God appeared at the same time rising forth as
two stars from the brightest families of model Orders, which have
always been prepared as things most useful to holy Church in defending
the catholic religion, and in undertaking all labors and dangers for
the orthodox faith, from which, as from a fertile and well cultivated
soil, daily by the grace of God fecund and fruitful plants are
procreated, by this is meant those men outstanding in doctrine and
sanctity, who energetically conduct the strong and faithful work of the
bark of Peter, driven about by so many waves, and of the Roman Pontiff,
holding (as he does) his key not without the greatest sollicitude.
These two Saints, since they were contemporaries and given to the very
same studies, students together, teachers at the same time, after they
both had been summoned to the Council by Gregory X, the Supreme
Pontiff, for similar reasons, honored, and in the pilgrimage of this
life by fraternal charity, by spiritual familiarity, they have been
very much conjoined in a fellowship of holy works, and at last
migrating onward together with equal pace to the celestial fatherland,
equally happy and glorious they enjoy to the full that sempiternal
beatitude, where with the same affection of charity, as We piously
believe, they pray for Us laboring in this vale of tears and implore
the divine power of assistance, so that deservedly did the same Sixtus
IV, acknowledging that these two Saints where thoroughly alike and
almost twin brothers in Christ, establish, that Saint Bonaventure and
Saint Thomas must be adorned with a like perogative of veneration and
honor.

14. Therefore because by Us both the charity of the seraphic Order, and
the magnitude of the merits of Saint Bonaventure, and the utility and
edification of the Catholic Church, whose helms have been committed by
God to Us, though undeservedly, require, with the mature deliberation
of Our venerable brothers, the [16]Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church,
having been heard, from the counsel and unanimous consent of the same
and from Our certain knowledge and the fullness of Apostolic power
bestowed upon Us, by this Our perpetually valid constitution, that the
doctrine of this very Saint Bonaventure, praised by Our abovesaid
precedessors, Clement IV, Gregory X, and Sixtus IV, greatly approved in
the Council of Lyons, employed also at the Council of Florence to
explain difficult matters, testified to and commended by the authority
of the gravest of men and worthy of an exceptional [17]Doctor of the
Church, We also greatly praise and commend in the Lord, and also the
letters of the same Sixtus IV, which We want to be considered expressly
at this moment, excepting the arrangement for celebrating the feast day
of Saint Bonaventure on the second Sunday of July, approving and
renewing by the tenor of these (letters), We determine and declare,
that Saint Bonaventure himself, lawfully inscribed and ennumerated
together with the company of the holy Doctors by the same Sixtus IV, by
Apostolic authority with the tenor of these present letters, must be
held and venerated among the preeminent and primary (Doctors), who
excel in the guidance of theological ability.

15. And on account of that We, hoping in the Lord, that the nightly
study of the Seraphic Doctor in doctrine and devotion, which We greatly
desire to shine and burn among the clergy and christian people, will be
the greatest help, We determine and will that his books, commentaries,
smaller works, and in short all his works, be cited, published, and
when it is demanded, employed, in the manner in which they have been
most faultlessly published by Our Vatican press, as has been said
above, just as are those of the other Doctors of the Church, who are
exceptional, not only in private, but publicly, in lecture halls,
academies, schools, colleges, in lectures, disputations,
interpretations, addresses, sermons and in all other ecclesiatical
studies and christian practices.

16. And nevertheless, so that a glorious remembrance of this wisest
Doctor, if not for the sake of his own dignity, at least for the sake
of human refinement, be refostered on account of his vast merits with
more ardent study, We, induced by the example of Our precedessor, Pope
Boniface VII, of happy remembrance, who gave instructions concerning
the four holy Doctors, and that of Pope Pius V, concerning the
aforesaid same Saint Thomas, do precept, that his office be celebrated
by all persons ecclesiastical, secular, and regular of whatever Orders
as much in public as in private on the day before the Ides of July
(with the aforesaid arrangement of Sixtus IV, concerning the second
Sunday of the said month, not withstanding) and so that this should be
explained and printed in the Calendars, with the name of the Doctor and
the addition of "festum duplex", even if in the reforms of the most
recent breviaries and of the Roman Missal it had been arranged
otherwise, and We determine that it cannot be judged nor interpreted
otherwise than as had been ordained by Us above, by whomsoever endowed
with whatever authority

17. Exorting all the faithful of Christ, of both sexes, in the city of
Bagnoregio, which gave forth this most bright light, and those of the
diocese, that they abstain on this same feast day from servile works,
according to the custom of the Church: however so that the devotion of
Christ's faithful be enkindled to honor the feast day of this Doctor
and to piously implore his power of assitance, more than it is, on
which they might perceive themselves to be refreshed by this gift of
celestial grace, by the mercy of the omnipotent God and entrusted with
His authority to blessed Peter and Paul, the Apostles, We mercifully
concede and grant in the Lord a plenary indulgence and remission of all
sins, to all Christ's faithful, of both sexes, who, gathered together
as much in the said city and diocese of Bagnoregio, as in the very
bright city of Lyons, where he fought the good fight lawfully, where
with the race finished, the faith kept, he happlily migrated from this
calamitous age to the reward and crown of his merits in Heaven, and in
Our kind city, where in that Basilica of the Twelve Holy Apostles, a
college had been erected by Us, as We have already said, devoutly
honoring his very feast, as other festivities are usually observed
according to the precept of the Church, truly penitent and having made
a sacramental confession of their sins, would on the same day receive
the Most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. To those who would truly
visit the churches of the Friars Minor of Saint Francis on the very day
of the feast, from the first vespers until sunset on the day proper,
pouring forth prayers there to God, as their own devotion might
suggest, We remit ten years and as many forty-days of those penances
enjoined upon them, or owed in any other manner whatsoever, by means of
these present letters that will endure perpetually, which We do not
want to be included under whatever revocations or limitations of
indulgences.

18. Wherefore We command your fraternity and discretion by means of
these Apostolic writings, to procure that whatsoever is contained in
them be published solemnly in whatever of your provinces, cities,
churches, and dioceses, and that by all persons ecclesiastical,
secular, and regular of whatever Order, of whatever place and nation,
they be observed perpetually inviolable.

19. Moreover We will, that to the copies of these present letters, even
those printed, signed by the hand of any public notary, and endowed
with the seal of any person constituted in ecclesiastical dignity,
there be exhibited everywhere that same straightforward faith, which
would be exhibited to these present letters, if they were displayed or
show to them.

20. To entirely no man therefore be it licit to infringe, or with rash
daring to contravene, this page of Our approbation, renewal, decrees,
declaration, determinations, precept, concession, grant, remission and
command. If anyone however would presume to attempt this, he will know
himself to have incurred the indignation of the omnipotent God and of
His Apostles, Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome in the Basilica of the Twelve Holy Apostles, in the year
of the Incarnation of the Lord, one thousand five hundred and
eighty-eighth, one the day before the Ides of March, in the third year
of Our Pontificate.

