____________________

[8]Pope Gregory XVI - Probe Nostis - On the Propagation of the Faith, 18
September 1840

[9]Pope Gregory XVI Venerable Brothers, We Give You Greeting and Our
Apostolic Blessing.

1. You are well aware, venerable brothers, of the many misfortunes
which now afflict the Catholic Church. You know, too, that holy
religion is being attacked by the pollution of errors of every kind and
by the unbridled rashness of renegades. At the same time heretics and
unbelievers attempt by cleverness and deceit to pervert the hearts and
minds of the faithful You are aware, in shore, that practically no
effort has been left untried in the attempt to overthrow the
unshakeable building of the holy city. In particular, We are obliged,
alas! to see the wicked enemies of truth spread everywhere unpunished.
They harass religion with ridicule, the Church with insults, and
Catholics with arrogance and calumny. They even enter cities and towns,
establish schools of error and impiety, and publish their poisonous
teachings which are adapted to secret deceit by misusing the natural
sciences and recent discoveries. Furthermore they enter the hovels of
the poor, traverse the countryside, and seek the acquaintance of the
farmers and the lowest classes. They try every method of attracting the
uneducated, especially the youth, to their sects, and of making them
desert the Catholic faith, whether by means of Bibles inaccurately
translated into the vernacular, pestilential newspapers and pamphlets
of little weight, or by seductive speeches, pretended charity, and
gifts of money.

2. We mention events which you yourselves witness. For despite your
sorrow and your pastoral denunciations, you are obliged to tolerate in
your dioceses these men spreading heresy and unbelief, these assertive
preachers who ceaselessly waylay and ravage your flock by going around
in sheep's clothing while inwardly they are ravening wolves. What more
can We add? There is hardly any uncivilized district left in the entire
world to which headquarters of the main societies of heretics and
unbelievers have not sent scouts and emissaries without counting the
cost. These men, by waging secret or open war on the Catholic religion
and its pastors and ministers, tear the faithful from the bosom of the
Church and prevent unbelievers from entering it.

3. You can easily imagine the straits in which We live, since We are
laden with the care of Christ's flock and the churches, and must
therefore render a detailed account to the divine Prince of Shepherds.
For this reason We decided to recall in this letter the causes of the
troubles which beset both Us and you. You can then reflect how
important it is for all the bishops to redouble their efforts so as to
break the assault of the enemies, to beat back their attacks, and to
forewarn and protect the faithful from their clever appeals. We have
been doing this, and We shall not stop. We know that you have likewise
done so, and We are confident that you will continue.

4. However, in order not to lose heart, "we should all be sure not to
fear them as if We had to overcome them by our own strength, since
Christ is both our counsel and our courage. As we can do nothing
without Him, with Him we can do all things. To give strength to the
preachers of the Gospel and ministers of the sacraments, He says,
`Behold I am with you all days even to the end of the world' and also,
`I have spoken these things to you that you may have peace in me; in
the world you shall have affliction but take heart, I have overcome the
world.' So clear and indisputable are these promises that no scandals
should make us weak lest we seem unthankful for God's choice of us even
though His help is as effective as His promises are true."1

5. Even in our time all can see those clear results of the divine
promise which never have failed and never shall fail in the Church.
They are plainly seen in the unconquerable constancy of the Church amid
so many enemy attacks, in the spread of religion amid such disturbance
and dangers, and in the consolation which "the Father of mercies and
the God of all consolation gives us in every trial." On the one hand We
have to lament the loss which the Catholic religion has suffered and
continues to suffer in certain districts. But the many victories which
the unconquerable constancy of Catholics and their priests has won and
continues to win even in those districts gives us ground for joy. We
rejoice greatly also at its marvellously abundant gains despite so many
hindrances. This proves even to our enemies that oppression of the
Church frequently contributes to its glory and strengthens the
faithful.

6. We are thankful for the success of apostolic missions in America,
the Indies, and other faithless lands. The indefatigable zeal of many
apostolic men has led them abroad into those places. Relying not on
wealth nor on any army, they are protected by the shield of faith
alone. They fearlessly fight the Lord's battles against heresy and
unbelief by private and public speech and writings. They are inspired
with a burning love and undeterred by rough roads and heavy toil. They
search out those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death to summon
them to the light and life of the Catholic Religion. So, fearless in
the face of every danger, they bravely enter the woods and caves of
savages, gradually pacify them by Christian kindness, and prepare them
for true faith and real virtue.

At length they snatch them from the devil's rule, by the bath of
regeneration and promote them to the freedom of God's adopted sons.

7. However, We are reduced to tears both of sorrow in Our detestation
of cruel persecutors and executioners, and of consolation in beholding
the heroic constancy of the confessors of the faith, as We recall here
the glorious deeds of the new martyrs in the Far East. We have already
praised them at length in an address to the consistory. Tonkin and
Cochin are still wet with the blood of many bishops, priests, and
faithful. They have repeated the achievement of the early Christian
martyrs in facing a cruel death for Christ undismayed by torture. This
is a major victory for the Church and for religion. It casts the
persecutors into confusion when they see that even today the divine
promises of unending protection and help are really fulfilled. This is
the reason why, in the words of Saint Leo: "the religion established by
the sacrament of the Cross of Christ cannot be destroyed by any kind of
cruelty."2

8. These events bring consolation and glory to the Catholic religion.
But there are other grounds of consolation for the Church. Pious
organizations are developing for the good of religion and Christian
society. Some of these assist the work of the holy apostolic missions.
God, who ceaselessly protects His Church, raises up within it new
societies as times, places, and circumstances require. Under the
Church's authority each society in its own ways devotes its full energy
to works of charity, the instruction of the faithful, and the spread of
the faith.

9. Likewise a source of joy to the Catholic world, and a wonder to non-
Catholics, are the many widespread sodalities of pious women. Under the
rule of Saint Vincent de Paul or in association with other approved
Institutes, they are remarkable in their practice of the Christian
virtues. They devote themselves entirely either to saving women from
the way of perdition, or to training girls in religion, solid piety and
the tasks suited to their state in life, or to relieving the dire want
of their neighbors with every assistance. No natural weakness of their
sex or fear of any danger holds them back.

10. A similar cause of joy for Us and for all good men are those groups
of the faithful who recently have begun to meet regularly in many
cities, especially the larger ones. Their purpose is to combat bad
books with good ones written by themselves or others, displaying purity
of doctrine instead of foul forms of error and Christian gentleness and
charity instead of insults and attacks.

11. Finally We must praise most highly the well known society which is
constantly expanding, not alone in Catholic territories but even in the
countries of non-Catholics and unbelievers. This society enables the
faithful of every class to help the apostolic missions and to have a
share themselves in the spiritual graces of these missions. We are
referring, as you realize, to the famous Society for the Propagation of
the Faith.

12. Now you know both the sorrows which afflict Us for Our losses and
of the consolations which sustain Us in the victories of the Catholic
religion. We are concerned though that these societies should continue
to grow. We earnestly urge you, then, to cherish, protect, and augment
them in your own dioceses.

13. The principal society which We recommend to you is the Society for
the Propagation of the Faith. First organized in Lyons in 1822, it
spread with marvellous speed and success. But certainly We recommend
equally other societies of this type founded at Vienna and elsewhere.
Their names are different, but they work at the same task of the
propagation of the faith, a task which enjoys the religious support and
favor of Catholic princes.

14. This task is sustained and strengthened by the moderate offerings
and daily prayers to God said by each of the members. It is directed to
practicing the works of Christian charity towards neophytes, and to
delivering the faithful from the attack of persecution. Consequently,
We consider it deserving of the admiration and love of all good men. A
work so beneficial to the Church can have begun so recently only by the
special design of divine providence. For when every kind of plot of the
infernal enemy besets the beloved spouse of Christ, the Church could
have no more timely good fortune than this ardent desire of the
faithful to spread Catholic truth.

15. For this reason, established as We are despite Our unworthiness in
the Papacy, We Ourselves affirm with Our predecessors Our complete
support for this great work. Sharing Our concern, you should see to it
that this important work flourishes among your flock. "Sing with the
trumpet in Sion" and by your fatherly advice see to it that those not
already members of the pious society are eager to become members, and
that those who are members persevere in their purpose. This is surely
the time "when the Christian battle line should smash the devil as he
rages all over the world;"3 it is indeed the time for the faithful to
join in this holy union with the priests. We have the strongest hope
that God, who ceaselessly supports His Church in its long hard fight
with its enemies and also gives it joy in the firmness, love and
devotion of the faithful, will grant it the peace it desires when He is
placated by Our combined prayers and pious works.

In the meantime We lovingly impart the apostolic blessing to
yourselves, venerable brothers, and to all the clergy and lay faithful
entrusted to your charge.

Given in Rome at Saint Mary Major with the seal of the fisherman on the
18th day of September 1840, in the tenth year of Our Pontificate.

NOTES
 1. Cf. Saint Leo the Great, epistle to Rusticus of Narbonne.
 2. Sermon 82 (80) on the feast day of the Apostles Peter and Paul.
 3. Cf. Saint Leo the Great. epistle to Rusticus of Narbonne.

