____________________

[8]Pope Gregory II - Commends Bishop Boniface to the Christians of Germany, 1
December 722

[9]Pope Gregory II Bishop Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to
all the very reverend and holy brethren, fellow-bishops, religious
priests and deacons, dukes, provosts, counts and all Christian men who
fear God.

Knowing that some of the peoples in the parts of Germany that lie on
the eastern bank of the Rhine have been led astray by the wiles of the
devil and now serve idols under the guise of the Christian religion,
and that others have not yet been cleansed by the waters of holy
Baptism, but like brute beasts are blind to their Creator, we have
taken great care to send the bearer of these letters, our revered
brother and fellow-bishop Boniface, into these parts to enlighten them
and to preach the word of faith, so that by his preaching he may teach
them the way of eternal life, and when he finds those who have been led
astray from the path of true faith or been misled by the cunning of the
devil he may reprove them, bring them back to the haven of salvation,
instruct them in the teachings of this Apostolic See and confirm them
in the Catholic faith.

We exhort you, then, for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ and the
reverence you bear to his apostles, to support him by all the means at
your disposal and to receive him in the name of Jesus, Christ,
according to what is written of His disciples: "He who receiveth you,
receiveth me." See to it that he has all he requires; give him
companions to escort him on his journey, provide him with food and
drink and anything else he may need, so that with the blessing of God
the work of piety and salvation committed' to him may proceed without
hindrance, and that you yourselves may receive the reward of your
labours and through the conversion of sinners may find treasure laid up
for you in heaven.

If, therefore, any man assists and gives succour to this servant of God
sent by the Apostolic See for the enlightenment of the heathen, may he
enjoy through the prayers of the princes of the Apostles the fellowship
of the saints and martyrs of Jesus Christ.

But if (which God forbid) any man should attempt to hinder his efforts
and oppose the work of the ministry entrusted to him and his
successors, may he be cursed by the judgment of God and condemned to
eternal damnation.

Fare ye well.

