____________________

[8]Homily at the Argentine National Church in Rome where the image of Our
Lady of Lujan was solemnly enthroned, by Pope John Paul II, 2 December 1998

[9]Pope Saint John Paul II Dear Brothers in the Episcopate and the
Priesthood, Distinguished Authorities, Dear Brothers and Sisters in the
Lord,

1. "Woman, behold, your son" (Jn 19:26). Jesus' words addressed to
[10]Mary, his Mother, from the tree of the Cross before the attentive
gaze of the disciple John, who recounts them in his Gospel, reveal the
Lord's desire to give as [11]Mother to his [12]Church at her birth -
the very [13]woman who once conceived him in her immaculate womb
through the action and grace of the Holy Spirit. Since then the
[14]Christian people have never hesitated to welcome the [15]Virgin
Mary with filial love, seeing in her an excellent gift from Christ.

[16]Our Lady of Loujan

2. This afternoon I come with great joy to visit the Argentine National
Church in [17]Rome, to meet you and to celebrate the Word of God with
you on the occasion of the enthronement in this church of the image of
Our Lady of Lujan, which I was pleased to bless during the Argentine
Bishops' last ad limina visit.

I am grateful to [18]Bishop Estanislao Karlic, President of the
Episcopal Conference, for the kind words he addressed to me at the
beginning of this celebration in the name of the entire Argentine
Episcopate. I return them, once again expressing to you, to
[19]Cardinal Raul Francisco Primatesta, [20]Archbishop of Cordoba and
[21]titular of this Church, and to the other [22]Bishops of
[23]Argentina, my deep appreciation in the Lord, which I extend to all
the [24]priests, religious communities and faithful of your
[25]Dioceses. In a certain way they are represented here today through
the [26]Argentine colony in [27]Rome, whose pastoral care is provided
by the community of [28]priests residing at this church, led by their
rector, [29]Father Antonio Cavalieri.

The Father has given his children an Immaculate Mother

I respectfully greet the President of the [30]Argentine nation, Dr
Carlos Saul Menem, as well as the members of the Government and the
civil authorities who have accompanied him and have wished to take part
in this liturgical celebration, full of symbolic significance because
it has taken place in this church which is the spiritual home of
[31]Argentine Catholics in the [32]Eternal City and the visible
expression of the deep bonds of communion and affection between the
beloved [33]Argentine people and the See of Peter. This beautiful
church dedicated to Our Lady of Sorrows was built through the
persistence of Mons. Jose Leon Gallardo, whose remains rest here, and
it has the honour of being the first national church in Rome of an
American republic. It must therefore continue as the Roman home of all
the Argentine faithful, a place of gathering and hospitality, of
friendship and fraternal reconciliation.

3. As [34]Saint [35]Paul teaches us in the first reading, we must give
thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, because in Christ
he has blessed us with every kind of blessing; he has chosen us in him
that we might be holy through love; and in the person of the Son he has
also destined us to be his adopted children (cf. Eph 1:3-6). Children
of God and brothers and sisters of Christ! This is the mystery of
divine sonship. From it arise the common dignity and fundamental
equality of all Christians, united to one another by the supernatural
bonds of brotherhood which are deeper and more lasting than the
ideologies, factionalism or group interests of our world.

4. God the Father, rich in mercy, has given his earthly children an
Immaculate Mother: the Mother of Jesus. As we heard in the Gospel, high
on the Cross, the supreme seat of love and sacrifice, Jesus speaks to
his Mother and to the disciple. To his Mother he said: "Woman, behold,
your son!". He then said to the disciple: "Behold, your Mother!" (cf.
Jn 19:25-27). Looking at Our Lady of Sorrows, who dominates the apse of
this church, we can better understand that Mary's new motherhood in the
order of grace is the fruit of the love which achieved its full growth
at the foot of the cross, through her participation in the Son's
redeeming love. In this way [36]Mary acquired a new title on Calvary,
which is why she is and can be called the spiritual Mother of her Son's
brothers and sisters.

Jesus entrusts us to [37]Mary as our Mother, and [38]Mary receives us
all as her children! This is Christ's testament on the Cross. On the
one hand, he entrusts the Church to the care of his own Mother; on the
other, he entrusts his Mother to the care of the Church. The scene on
Calvary reveals to us the secret of true Marian piety, which is a
filial love of surrender and gratitude to Mary, a love of imitation and
of consecration to her person.

Help the Argentine people in their defence of life

5. Just as Saint John, the beloved disciple, took Mary into his home,
today too the [39]Argentine people take her into their Roman home
through the enthronement of her holy image of Lujan. To take Mary in,
to offer her the throne of our hearts and minds, has a profound meaning
which is far deeper than mere sentiment: it is the experience of our
own poverty, which turns confidently to Mary's all-powerful pleading
with the Father; it is uniting our own will to Mary's, saying "yes" as
she did, so that Christ will fully enter our lives. Today, as we
enthrone this image of [40]Our Lady, all [41]Argentine [42]Catholics
can hear [43]Mary`s motherly invitation to renew their love for Christ
and to measure themselves by the truth of the Gospel, which renews
individuals and institutions; at the end of our life, we will be judged
according to our response.

6. [44]Our Lady of Lujan, [45]patroness of [46]Argentina, today I kneel
before your image as the Pure and Immaculate Conception, together with
all the sons and daughters of this beloved land, whose eyes and hearts
are focused on you. At the crossroads of the third millennium, I
entrust the [47]Argentine nation to you, Holy Mother of Lujan: the
hopes and yearnings of her people; her families and homes, that they
may live in holiness; her children and young people, that they may grow
in peace and harmony, and attain the fullness of their human and
Christian vocation; I also entrust to you the daily efforts and shared
dialogue of employers, workers and politicians, who find their most
authentic inspiration in the Church's social teaching. Take under your
protection all who are suffering, the poor, the sick and the
marginalized. Make all [48]Argentina faithful to your Son; may it open
its heart wide to Christ, the Redeemer of man, the sure hope of
humanity.

Our Lady of Lujan, help the people of Argentina, support them in their
defence of life, console them in their suffering, accompany them in
their joys and always help them to raise their eyes to heaven, where
the colours of their flag blend with the colours of your immaculate
mantle. To you, the Church's honour and praise forever, Mother of Jesus
and our Mother!

- Pope John Paul II

