____________________

[8]Pope Gregory II Replies to a Report From Boniface, 4 December 723

[9]Pope Gregory II To his most reverend brother and fellow-bishop
Boniface, Gregory, the servant of the servants of God.

Moved by our anxiety for the charge committed to us and by the words of
the Gospel, which says, "You must ask the lord to whom the harvest
belongs to send labourers out to the harvesting", we sent you just as
the Lord sent the Apostles with the command: "Go out all over the world
and preach the Gospel: freely you have received, freely give."

We sent you to shed some light on the people of Germany who sit in the
shadow of death, so that, like the servant with the single talent, you
might make some profit for God. And as we see that through your
obedience the ministry of the Word has succeeded and, as we hear, by
your preaching great numbers have been converted to the faith, we give
thanks to God that He from whom all good proceeds and whose win it is
that all men should be led to recognize the truth, should second your
efforts and bring this people by His powerful inspiration from darkness
to light.

For this reason we believe that a bountiful reward is laid up by
Almighty God for us in heaven. If you are steadfast, you will be able
to say with the Apostle: " I have fought the good fight, I have
finished the race, I have redeemed my pledge." To gain the prize, you
must persevere, for God promises it only to those who are steadfast to
the end.

Do not be frightened by threats or discouraged by fears. Keep your
trust fixed on God and proclaim the word of truth. Provided your will
is constant in good works, God win crown it by His help. Therefore, the
more people you convert from the errors of their ways (and that this is
so we know from your letter), the more we shall rejoice and thank God
for the gaining of souls.

As for the bishop who was too lazy to preach the Word of God and now
claims a part of your diocese, we have written to our son, Duke
Charles, asking him to restrain him, and we believe that he will put a
stop to it. For your part, however, continue to preach in season and
out of season.

We have written to the people of Thuringia and Germany regarding
matters which concern their spiritual welfare, ordering them among
other things to erect bishoprics and build churches. For He who desires
not the death of the sinner but his conversion win grant an increase in
everything.

May God preserve you.

