____________________

[9]Pope Francis - Address at the Colosseum, 29 March 2013

[10]Pope Francis Dear Brother and Sisters, thank you for having taken
part in these moments of deep prayer. I also thank those who have
accompanied us through the media, especially the sick and elderly.

I do not wish to add too many words. One word should suffice this
evening, that is the Cross itself. The Cross is the word through which
God has responded to evil in the world. Sometimes it may seem as though
God does not react to evil, as if he is silent. And yet, God has
spoken, he has replied, and his answer is the Cross of Christ: a word
which is love, mercy, forgiveness. It also reveals a judgment, namely
that God, in judging us, loves us. If I embrace his love then I am
saved, if I refuse it, then I am condemned, not by him, but my own
self, because God never condemns, he only loves and saves.

Dear brothers and sisters, the word of the Cross is also the answer
which Christians offer in the face of evil, the evil that continues to
work in us and around us. Christians must respond to evil with good,
taking the Cross upon themselves as Jesus did. This evening we have
heard the witness given by our Lebanese brothers and sisters: they
composed these beautiful prayers and meditations. We extend our
heartfelt gratitude to them for this work and for the witness they
offer. We were able to see this when Pope Benedict visited Lebanon: we
saw the beauty and the strong bond of communion joining Christians
together in that land and the friendship of our Muslim brothers and
sisters and so many others. That occasion was a sign to the Middle East
and to the whole world: a sign of hope.

We now continue this Via Crucis in our daily lives. Let us walk
together along the Way of the Cross and let us do so carrying in our
hearts this word of love and forgiveness. Let us go forward waiting for
the Resurrection of Jesus.

