____________________

[8]Pope Paul III - Bull of the Convocation of the Council of Trent, 22 May
1542

[9]Pope Paul III Under Pope Paul III, Bishop, servant of the servants
of God, for a perpetual remembrance hereof

Recognizing at the very beginning of our pontificate, which the divine
providence of Almighty God, not for any merit of our own, but by reason
of its own great goodness, has committed to us, to what troubled times
and to how many distresses in almost all affairs our pastoral
solicitude and vigilance were called, we desired indeed to remedy the
evils that have long afflicted and well-night overwhelmed the Christian
commonwealth; but we also, as men compassed with infirmity,[1] felt our
strength unequal to take upon ourselves such a burden.

For while we realized that peace was necessary to free and preserve the
commonwealth from the many dangers that threatened it, we found all
filled with hatreds and dissensions, and particularly those princes, to
whom God has entrusted almost the entire direction of affairs, at
enmity with one another.

Whilst we deemed it necessary for the integrity of the Christian
religion and for the confirmation within us of the hope of heavenly
things, that there be one fold and one shepherd[2] for the Lord's
flock, the unity of the Christian name was well-nigh rent and torn
asunder by schisms, dissensions and heresies.

Whilst we desired the commonwealth to be safe and protected against the
arms and insidious designs of the infidels, yet, because of our
transgressions and the guilt of us all, indeed, because of the wrath of
God hanging over us by reason of our sins, Rhodes had been lost,
Hungary ravaged, war by land and sea intended and planned against
Italy, and against Austria and Illyria, since the Turk, our godless and
ruthless enemy, was never at rest and looked upon our mutual enmities
and dissensions as his fitting opportunity to carry out his designs
with success.

Wherefore, having been called, as we have said, in so great a tempest
of heresies, discords and wars and in such restlessness of the waves to
rule and pilot the bark of Peter, and not trusting sufficiently our own
strength, we first of all cast our cares upon the Lord,[3] that He
might sustain us and provide our soul with firmness and strength, our
understanding with prudence and wisdom.

Then, considering that our predecessors, endowed with admirable wisdom
and sanctity, had often in the greatest dangers of the Christian
commonwealth had recourse to ecumenical councils and general assemblies
of bishops as the best and most suitable remedy, we also decided to
hold a general council.

When, on consulting the opinions of the princes whose consent in this
matter we deemed particularly useful and expedient, we found them at
that time not averse to so holy a work, we, as our letters and records
attest, summoned an ecumenical council and a general assembly of those
bishops and fathers, whose duty it is to attend, to be opened in the
city of Mantua on the twenty-third of May in the year 1537 of our
Lord's incarnation and the third of our pontificate; entertaining
almost the assured hope that when we should be assembled there in the
name of the Lord, He would, as He promised, be in our midst[4] and in
His goodness and mercy dispel with ease by the breath of His mouth all
the storms and dangers of the times.

But, as the enemy of mankind always plots against pious enterprises, at
the very outset, contrary to all our hopes and expectations, the city
of Mantua was refused us, unless we subscribed to certain conditions
which were totally irreconcilable with the ordinances of our
predecessors, with the condition of the times, with our own dignity and
liberty, and with that of the Apostolic See and the ecclesiastical
name, as we have made known in other letters.

Wherefore we were obliged to find another place and to choose another
city, and since a convenient and suitable one did not immediately
present itself, we were constrained to prorogue the celebration of the
council to the following first day of November.

In the meantime, the Turk, our cruel and everlasting enemy, having
attacked Italy with a powerful fleet, captured, sacked and ravaged
several cities on the shores of Apulia and carried off as booty the
inhabitants, while we, in the greatest fear and general danger, were
occupied in fortifying our shores and in furnishing assistance to the
nearest neighboring localities.

At the same time, however, we did not neglect to consult and exhort the
Christian princes to inform us what in their opinion would be a
suitable place to hold the council, and since their opinions were
various and uncertain, and there seemed to be needless delay, we, with
the best intention and, we think, with prudence, chose Vicenza, a
populous city, which by reason of the valor, esteem and power of the
Venetians, who conceded it to us, offered not only free access but also
and especially a free and safe place of residence for all.

But since time had already far advanced and the choice of the new city
had to be made known to all, the proximity of the first of November
precluding any announcement of this change, and winter moreover was
near, we were again obliged to prorogue the council to the following
spring, that is, to the first of the next May.

This having been firmly settled and decreed, we considered, while
preparing ourselves and everything else to hold and celebrate that
council successfully with the help of God, that it was a matter of
prime importance both for the celebration of the council and for
Christendom, that the Christian princes be united in peace and concord,
and so we did not fail to implore and beseech our most beloved sons in
Christ, Charles, ever august Emperor of the Romans, and Francis, the
most Christian King, the two chief props and supports of the Christian
name, to come together in a conference with us.

Both of them we very often urged by letters, nuncios and legates a
latere selected from the number of our venerable brethren, to lay aside
their jealousies and animosities, to agree to an alliance and holy
friendship, and to succor the tottering state of Christendom, for the
preservation of which especially did God give him power; and in case of
neglect to do this and of failure to direct all their counsels to the
common welfare of Christendom, they would have to render to Him a
strict and severe account.

Yielding at last to our petitions they repaired to Nice, whither we
also, for the cause of God and of bringing about peace, undertook a
long and, to our advanced age, very fatiguing journey.

Neither did we neglect in the meantime, as the time set for the
council, namely, the first of May, approached, to send to Vicenza three
legates a latere, men of the greatest worth and esteem, chosen from the
number of our brethren, the cardinals of the holy Roman Church, to open
the council, to receive the prelates coming from various parts, and to
transact and attend to such matters as they should deem necessary, till
we ourselves on our return from our journey and mission of peace should
be able to direct everything with greater exactness.

In the meantime we applied ourselves with all the zeal, love and energy
of our soul to that holy and most necessary work, the establishment of
peace among the princes.

God is our witness, in whose goodness we trusted when we exposed
ourselves to the dangers of the journey and of life.

Our conscience is witness, and in this matter certainly cannot reproach
us with having either neglected or not sought an opportunity to effect
a reconciliation.

Witnesses are the princes themselves, whom we so often and so urgently
implored through our nuncios, letters, legates, admonitions,
exhortations and entreaties of every kind to lay aside their jealousies
and form an alliance, that with united zeal and action they might aid
the Christian commonwealth, already reduced to the greatest immediate
danger.

Witnesses, moreover, are those vigils and anxieties, those labors and
strenuous exertions of our soul by day and night, which we have endured
to such large measure in this matter and cause.

For all that, our counsels and labors have not yet produced the desired
results; for so it pleased the Lord our God, who, however, we trust
will yet look more favorably on our wishes.

We ourselves have not in this matter, so far as we could, omitted
anything pertaining to the duty of our pastoral office.

If there be any who interpret our efforts for peace in any other sense,
we are grieved indeed, but in our grief we nevertheless give thanks to
Almighty God who, as an example and a lesson of patience to us, willed
that His own Apostles should be accounted worthy to suffer reproach for
the name of Jesus who is our peace.[5]

However, though by reason of our sins a true and lasting peace between
the two princes could not be effected in our meeting and conference at
Niece, nevertheless, a truce of ten years was agreed upon; and hoping
that as a result of this the holy council might be celebrated more
beneficially and thus by its authority peace be permanently
established, we urged the princes to come to the council themselves and
to bring with them the prelates who had accompanied them and to summon
those absent.

On both these points, however, they excused themselves on the grounds
that it was necessary for them to return to their kingdoms and that the
prelates who had accompanied them, being wearied and exhausted by the
journey and its expenses, must recover and recruit themselves, and they
besought us to decree yet another prorogation of the time for the
opening of the council.

While we were rather unwilling to yield in this, we received in the
meantime letters from our legates at Vicenza, announcing that though
the day for the opening of the council had arrived, indeed had long
since passed, hardly more than one or two prelates had repaired to
Vicenza from foreign nations.

Since we saw on receipt of this information that the council could
under no circumstances be held at this time, we yielded to the princes
and put off the time for the opening of the council till the following
Easter, the feast of the resurrection of the Lord.

The decretal letters concerning this our ordinance and prorogation were
given and published at Genoa on the twenty-eighth of June in the year
of the incarnation of our Lord 1538.

This delay we granted the more readily because each of the princes
promised to send ambassadors to us at Rome, that those things which
remained for the perfect establishment of peace and which on account of
the brevity of time could not be accomplished at Nice, might be
considered and negotiated more conveniently in our presence at Rome.

And for this reason also both requested that the peace negotiations
might precede the celebration of the council, for with peace
established the council would be much more beneficial and salutary to
the Christian commonwealth.

It was this hope for peace that moved us always to yield to the wishes
of the princes, a hope that was greatly strengthened by the kind and
friendly conference between those two princes after our departure from
Nice, the news of which, giving us the greatest joy, confirmed us in
the good hope, so that we believed God had at last listened to our
prayers and received our earnest wishes for peace.

This conclusion of peace, therefore, we earnestly desired and urged,
and since it was the opinion not only of the two aforesaid princes but
also of our most dear son in Christ, Ferdinand, King of the Romans,
that the work of the council ought not to be undertaken till peace had
been established, and all urged us by letters and through their
spokesmen to decide on a further prorogation of the time, particularly
insistent being the most illustrious Emperor, who declared that he had
promised those who dissent from Catholic unity that he would consider
the matter with us on their behalf to the end that some plan of
agreement might be arranged, which could not be done satisfactorily
before his return to Germany, and guided throughout by the same hope of
peace and the wishes of such powerful princes, and above all, seeing
that even on the said feast of the resurrection no other prelates had
assembled at Vicenza, we, now avoiding the word prorogation, which has
been so often repeated in vain, preferred to suspend the celebration of
the general council during our own good pleasure and that of the
Apostolic See.

This we therefore did and dispatched letters concerning this suspension
to each of the aforesaid princes on the tenth day of June, 1539, as may
be clearly seen therein.

This suspension having been made by force of circumstances, we looked
forward to that more favorable time and to some conclusion of peace
that would later bring dignity and numbers to the council as well as a
more immediate safety to the Christian commonwealth.

But the affairs of Christendom meanwhile became worse day by day. The
Hungarians on the death of their king called in the Turks; King
Ferdinand declared war against them; a portion of Belgium was incited
to revolt against the Emperor, who, to crush that rebellion, traversed
France into Belgium on the most friendly and peaceful terms with the
most Christian King and with a great manifestation of mutual good will
toward each other.

Thence he returned to Germany where he began to hold diets of the
princes and cities of Germany with a view to discuss that agreement of
which he had spoken to us.

But as the hope for peace was already on the wane and that method of
providing and establishing unity by means of diets seemed rather
adapted to produce greater discord, we were led to return to our former
remedy of a general council, and through our legates, cardinals of the
holy Roman Church, proposed this to the Emperor himself, which we also
did later and especially in the Diet of Ratisbon, at which our beloved
son, Gasparo Contarini, Cardinal of St. Praxedes, acted as our legate
with great learning and integrity.

For since, as we had previously feared, we might be petitioned by a
decision of the diet to declare that certain articles maintained by the
dissenters from the Church be tolerated til they be examined and
decided upon by an ecumenical council, and since neither Christian and
Catholic truth, nor our own dignity nor that of the Apostolic See would
permit us to yield in this, we chose rather to command that it be
proposed openly that a council be held as soon as possible.

Neither did we ever have any other intention and wish than that an
ecumenical and general council should be convened at the earliest
opportunity.

For we hoped that thereby peace might be restored to the Christian
people and integrity to the will and favor of the Christian princes.

However, while looking forward to this will, while watching for the
hidden time, the time of thy good pleasure, O Lord, we were at last
forced to conclude that all time is pleasing to God when there is a
question of deliberation on holy things and on such as pertain to
Christian piety.

Wherefore, beholding with the bitterest grief of our soul that the
affairs of Christendom were daily becoming worse, Hungary oppressed by
the Turks, Germany endangered, and all other states overwhelmed with
apprehension and grief, we resolved to wait no longer for the consent
of any prince, but to look solely to the will of the Almighty God and
to the good of the Christian commonwealth.

Wherefore, since the city of Vicenza was no longer at our disposal, and
we desired in our choice of a new place for holding the council to have
in mind both the common welfare of Christians and the conveniences of
the German nation, and seeing that among the various places proposed
these desired the city of Trent, we, though of opinion that everything
could be transacted more conveniently in Cisalpine Italy, nevertheless
yielded with paternal charity to their desires.

Accordingly, we have chosen the city of Trent as that in which the
ecumenical council is to be held on the following first day of
November, selecting that place as a convenient one in which the bishops
and prelates from Germany and from the nations bordering on Germany can
assemble very easily and those from France, Spain and other more remote
provinces without difficulty.

In fixing the day for the council, we considered that there should be
time both for the publication of this our decree throughout the
Christian nations and to make it possible for all the prelates to
arrive.

Our reason for not announcing the change of place of the council one
year in advance, as has been prescribed by certain constitutions,[7]
was this, that we were not willing that the hope of applying some
remedy to the Christian commonwealth, afflicted as it is with so many
disasters and calamities, should be delayed any longer, though we know
the times and recognize the difficulties, and we understand that what
may be looked for from our counsels is a matter of uncertainty.

But since it is written:

Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in him, and he will do it,[8] we
have resolved to trust in the clemency and mercy of God rather than
distrust our own weakness, for in undertaking good works it often
happens that where human counsels fail the divine power succeeds.

Wherefore, relying on the authority of Almighty God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and on that of His blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, which
we also exercise on earth, and supported also by the advice and assent
of our venerable brethren, the cardinals of the holy Roman Church,
having removed and annulled the aforesaid suspension, which by the
present we remove and annul, we announce, proclaim, convoke, ordain and
decree a holy ecumenical and general council to be opened on the first
day of November of the present year 1542 from the incarnation of the
Lord in the city of Trent, for all nations a commodious, free and
convenient place, to be there begun and prosecuted and with the help of
God concluded and completed to His glory and praise and the welfare of
the whole Christian people; and we summon, exhort and admonish, in
whatever country they may be, all our venerable brethren, the
patriarchs, archbishops, bishops, and our beloved sons, the abbots, as
well as all others who by law or privilege have the right to sit in
general councils and express their sentiments therein, enjoining and
strictly commanding them by virtue of their oath to us and to this Holy
See, and in virtue of holy obedience and under other penalties that by
law or custom are usually imposed and proposed in the celebration of
councils against absentees, that they attend and be present personally
at this holy council, unless they should perchance be hindered by a
just impediment, of which, however, they shall be obliged to give
proof, in which case they must be represented by their lawful
procurators and delegates.

Also the aforesaid Emperor and the most Christian King, as well as the
other kings, dukes and princes, whose presence, if ever, would
certainly at this time be very salutary to the most holy faith of
Christ and of all Christians, we beg and beseech by the bowels of the
mercy of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, the truth of whose faith and
whose religion are now so violently assailed both from within and
without, that if they wish the Christian commonwealth to be safe, if
they feel themselves bound and under obligation to the Lord for His
great favors toward them, they will not abandon His cause and interests
but will come personally to the celebration of the holy council, where
their piety and virtue would be greatly conducive to the common good,
to their own and the welfare of others, temporal as well as spiritual.

But if, which we do not wish, they themselves cannot appear, let them
at least send distinguished men entrusted with authority, each of whom
may represent in the council with prudence and dignity the person of
his prince.

But above all, and this is for them an easy matter, let them see to it
that the bishops and prelates of their respective kingdoms and
provinces proceed to the council without tergiversation and delay, a
favor that God himself and we can in justice claim particularly from
the prelates and princes of Germany; for since it is chiefly on their
account and at their wishes that the council has been summoned, and in
the very city that they desired, let them not regard it burdensome to
celebrate and adorn it with their presence, so that, God going before
us in our deliberations and holding before our minds the light of His
wisdom and truth, we may in the holy ecumenical council, in a better
and easier manner consider, and with the charity of all concurring to
one end, ponder, discuss, execute and bring speedily and happily to the
desired result whatever things pertain to the purity and truth of the
Christian religion, to the restoration of what is good and the
correction of bad morals, to the peace, unity and harmony of Christians
among themselves, of the princes as well as of the people, and whatever
is necessary to repulse those attacks of barbarians and infidels
whereby they seek the overthrow of all Christendom.

And that this our letter and its contents may come to the knowledge of
all whom it concerns, and that no one may plead ignorance as an excuse,
particularly since there may not perchance be free access to all to
whom it ought to be especially communicated, we wish and command that
it be read publicly and in a loud voice by the messengers of our court
or by some public notaries in the Vatican Basilica of the Prince of the
Apostles and in the Lateran Church, at a time when the people are
accustomed to assemble there to hear divine services; and after having
been read, let it be affixed to the doors of the said churches, also to
the gates of the Apostolic Chancery and to the usual place in the Campo
di Fiore, where it shall hang openly for some time for the perusal and
cognizance of all; and when removed thence, copies of it shall still
remain affixed in the same places.

For by being thus read, published and affixed, we wish that each and
all whom our aforesaid letter concerns be, after the interval of two
months from the day of being published and afixed, so bound and
obligated as if it had been read and published in their presence.

We command and decree also that an unshaken and firm faith be given to
transcripts thereof, written or subscribed by the hand of a notary
public and authenticated by the seal of some person constituted in
ecclesiastical dignity.

Therefore, let no one infringe this our letter of summons,
announcement, convocation, statute, decree, command, precept and
supplication, or with foolhardy boldness oppose it.

But if anyone shall presume to attempt this, let him know that he will
incur the indignation of Almighty God and of His blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul.

Given at Rome at Saint Peter's in the year 1542 of the Lord's
incarnation on the twenty-second of May, in the eighty year of our
pontificate.

Notes
Hebrews 5:2
 1. John 10:16
 2. Psalms 54:23
 3. Matthew 18
 4. Acts 5:41; Ephesians 2:14
 5. Psalms 68:14
 6. Council of Constance, Sess. XXXIX, const. Frequens.
 7. Psalms 36:5

