____________________

[8]Pope Clement V - Exivi de paradiso - On the Rule of the Friars Minor, 6
May 1312

[9]Pope Clement V Declaration of the supreme Pontiff on the Rule of the
Friars Minor

1. "When I went forth from Paradise, I said: I will water the garden of
plantings," said that heavenly Farmer, who being the true fount of
wisdom, the Word of God, flowing from the Father into the Father,
begotten from eternity, in these last days (by being formed by the Holy
Spirit) made flesh in the womb of the Virgin, went forth as a man to
accomplish the arduous work of the redemption of the human race: by
giving Himself as exemplar of heavenly life, proffering to men His very
own Self. But because man was very frequently pressed by the
solicitudes of mortal life, he was turning aside the sight of his mind
from the intuition of this kind of exemplar: our true Solomon made upon
the throne of the Church Militant a certain garden of delight among
others, distanced from the stormy waves of the world, in which one
might more quietly and securely be freed from beholding and observing
labors of this kind, He himself as an exemplar entered into this world,
to water it by the fecund waters of grace and doctrine. This garden is
indeed the holy Religion of the Friars Minor, which firmly enclosed by
the wall of regular observance, contented within herself with God alone
is adorned abundantly by new seedlings of sons. The beloved Son of God
coming upon this reaps the myrrh of mortifying penitence with
aromatics, which with a marvelous sweetness sprinkle about in all
places an odor of attracting holiness. This is that heavenly form of
life, and rule, which that excellent Confessor of Christ Saint Francis
wrote down; and taught equally by word and example to be observed by
his sons.

2. Because the professors and devout emulators of the said holy rule
were truly striving, as both pupils and true sons of such a Father,
just as even they fervently do strive, to observe firmly, without
mitigation, and entirely the aforementioned rule: attending to certain
things which might produce a doubtful sense contained in the text of
the very rule, for the sake of having a clarification of these very
same things they had recourse prudently at one time to the peak of
Apostolic dignity, that certified through Her, at whose feet even by
the rule itself they are subject, they might attend to the Lord (all
doubts having been driven away) with full clarity of conscience.
Likewise Our predecessors the Roman Pontiffs directing their ears and
souls to their pious and just supplications clarified one after another
(as was right) those things which seemed to be doubtful: they added
some things and conceded others, as seemed to disentangle the
consciences of the Friars, and the status of this unmitigated
observance. Truly and very frequently where there is no fault,
befrighted consciences, which fear greatly any deviation in the way to
God, are accustomed to fear it. From the said clarifications the
consciences of all of the said Friars have not been entirely quieted,
nay rather there are born and arise waves concerning those things
pertaining to the rule and to the condition of those doubting in these
matters, as have been brought to our ears many times, both from many
public and private consistories. Wherefore through these Friars We have
been humbly supplicated, in order that from the benignity of the
Apostolic See We might care to employ opportune remedies to the
aforesaid doubts, which have occurred, and which can occur in the
future.

3. Therefore We, whose soul from a tender age by pious devotion was
inflamed by the professors of this kind of rule, and by the whole Order
itself: now however from the common pastoral care of governing, which
We, unworthy, bear, We have been summoned as much more ardently to
those things which We have more sweetly cherished and by gracious
favors more attentively pursued, as more frequently with intent mind We
have opened the rich fruit, which We continually discern to come forth
from their exemplary life, and salutary doctrine for the entire
universal Church, moved as We are by so pious an intention of the
supplicants, to accomplish diligently to what is sought, We have
considered those things which have been directed to our examination:
and We have caused those very doubts to be diligently examined by many
Archbishops, and Bishops, and Masters in Theology, and other cautious
and discrete, lettered men.

4. Therefore first of all since from that which is in the beginning of
the said rule: "The Rule and life of the Friars Minor is this: namely
to observe the Holy Gospel of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by living in
obedience, without property, and in chastity." Likewise there follows:
"Having truly finished the year of probation, let them be received into
obedience promising always to observe this very life and rule."
Likewise about the end of the rule: "That We may observe, as We have
firmly promised, the poverty, humility, and Holy Gospel of Our Lord
Jesus Christ": it had been hesitated, whether the Friars of this same
Order are bound from the profession of their rule to everything, the
precepts as well as counsels of the Gospel: by certain ones saying,
that they are obliged to all: others however asserting, only to those
three counsels, namely, to live in obedience, in chastity, and without
property, and to those things, which are proposed under obligatory
words in the rule. We, adhering to the footprints of Our predecessors
concerning this article, and pursuing this very article for the sake of
something more clear, have considered that to the said hesitation it
must be replied, that since one judges the determinate vow of
whomsoever to fall sub certo, one vowing the rule cannot be said to be
held from the force of a vow of this kind to those Evangelical
counsels, which are not proposed in the rule, and indeed this is proved
to have been the intention of blessed Francis, the author of the Rule,
from this that certain Evangelical counsels are proposed in the rule,
others omitted. For if by this passage: "The Rule and life of the
Friars Minor is this: etc." he had intended to oblige them to every
evangelical counsel, he would have expressed superfluously and
frivolously in the rule certain of those things, while suppressing
others. Since however one judges this by the nature of a restrictive
term, that it so excludes the extraneous from itself, that it
circumscribes all things pertaining to itself: We declare and say, that
the said Friars are not only obliged merely and absolutely to those
three vows ratified by the profession of their rule, but they are bound
even to fulfill all those, pertaining to the aforesaid three, which are
proposed by the Rule itself. For if according to these aforesaid three
so briefly and merely promising themselves to observe the rule by
living in obedience, chastity, and without property, and not even to
every thing contained in the rule, which these three modify, they are
constrained for nothing and vainly they have professed these words: "I
promise always to observe this Rule": from which by these words no
obligation would arise. Nor for all that is it to be thought, that
blessed Francis intended the professors of this rule to be equally
obligated, as much as to every thing contained in the rule which
modifies the three vows, or to others expressed in the same; rather he
patently more ably distinguished, that in respect to certain things
from the force of the words the transgression of which is mortal, and
in respect to certain other things, not so: since he adds the word of
"precept" to certain things of the same, or of "equipollent" to
another, and in respect to other things he is content to use other
words.

5. Likewise because besides those things, which are proposed in the
rule expressly by word of precept, and exhortation, or admonition: some
such things are inserted by word of imperative mood negatively or
affirmatively, in as much as it has been doubted whether they are bound
to these things, as to things having the force of precept. And because
as We have understood, this doubt is not diminished, but augmented from
that which Our predecessor, Pope Nicholas III, of happy memory, is
known to have clarified, that the Friars themselves from the profession
of their rule are bound to those evangelic counsels, which in the rule
itself are expressed preceptorily or inhibitorily, or under equipollent
words; and no less to the observance of all those things, which are
indicated to themselves in the same rule under obligatory words; the
aforesaid Friars have supplicated Us, that We might deign to clarify
for their consciences the things to be observed, which ought to be
judged by them as equipollent and obligatory in precept. And thus We,
who are delighted in their sincere consciences, attending to these
because in that which respects the salvation of souls, the pars
securior must be held so as to avoid grave remorse of conscience: We
say that it is licit that the Friars not be bound to the observance of
all those things, which are proposed in the rule under words of
imperative mood, as to precepts or equipollent to precepts: it is
expedient however for the Friars themselves to observe the purity and
rigor of the rule, because they know themselves to be obliged to those
things, as to equipollent to precepts, which here following are
annotated. But as these things are to be held, which might seem to be
equipollent to precepts from the force of the words, or at least by
reason of the matter about which they pertain, or from both sub
compendio: We declare them to be that which is proposed in the rule
concerning not having more than one tunic with a capuche, & another
without a capuche; likewise concerning not wearing footwear, & not
riding horseback outside of the case of necessity: likewise that the
Friars are to wear cheap clothing. Similarly that they are bound to
fast from the [10]Feast of All Saints up to the Nativity of the Lord,
and on Fridays: likewise that the Clerics are to recite the divine
office according to the ordo of the Holy Roman Church: likewise that
the Ministers, and the custodes for the necessities of the infirm, and
for the clothing of the Friars are to exercise a solicitous care:
likewise that if any of the Friars might fall into infirmity, the other
friars ought to take care of him: likewise that the Friars may not
preach in the diocese of any Bishop, when they have been opposed by
him: likewise that no one should dare remotely preach to the people,
unless he has been examined and appointed by the Minister General, or
by others, to whom according for the aforesaid declaration it belongs:
likewise that the Friars who might know that they themselves are not
able to observe spiritually the aforementioned rule, ought and can have
recourse to their Ministers: likewise everything that is proposed in
the rule for the form of the habit both of the novices, as well as of
the professed: and also to the manner of reception, and the things
regarding profession, but not for those receiving the habit of Novices
(as the rule says) since it may seem otherwise according to God. All
these (We say) must be observed by the Friars as obligatory: likewise
the regimen that is commonly thought, held, and has been held from
antiquity, which is proposed throughout the rule with this word: "They
are bound (teneantur)," obtains force of precept: and ought to be
observed as such by the Friars.

6. Because the aforesaid Confessor of Christ said in the rule,
proffering a means to the Ministers and Friars, concerning all those
things to be done and observed about those who were to be received into
the Order, that the Friars and their Ministers should beware, lest they
be solicitous concerning their temporal things, so that they may freely
do with them whatever had been inspired in them by the Lord: the
Ministers however may have license to send them to other God fearing
men if counsel is requires, by whose counsel they may bestow their
goods to the poor: many Friars have doubted and doubt still, whether it
is licit for themselves to receive anything from the goods of those
entering if it is given: and if they might induce them to give to
persons and convents without fault: if the Ministers or Friars ought
even to give counsel to arranging the distribution of such things,
where others, to whom they may send those who will enter, might be
found conveniently. We, however, considering that Saint Francis
attentively considered to distance especially and totally the
professors of his rule, whom he had founded in the greatest poverty,
from the affection of the temporal things of those very ones entering
by the said words, as much as on the part of the Friars themselves, the
reception into the Order might appear holy and most pure, and lest by
any means they seem to have an eye to their temporal goods, rather than
to free them for the same divine service: We say concerning all of this
that the Ministers just as the Friars ought themselves to abstain
giving both persuasions and also counsels concerning the distribution
to the said inductees, since for this they ought to be sent to God
fearers of another state, not to Friars: that they may appear before
all truly to be very studios zealots, assiduous and perfect, of the
salvific, paternal plan. When truly doing with his own things what the
Lord will inspire him, the self same rule desires him to be free from
those receiving him, it does not seem even licit to receive these,
namely having considered their necessities and the directions of the
declaration already spoken of; if the one entering wishes freely to
give of his goods just as to other poor by means of almsgiving: it
befits however the Friars in accepting such offerings to beware, lest
from a notable quantity of received goods, ill repute might befall
them.

7. Besides since it is said the in the rule, that those who have
already promised obedience, may have one tunic with a capuche, and
another without a capuche if they wish to have it: likewise that every
Friar is to wear cheap clothing: and We have declared them to be
equipollent in precept by the aforesaid words: wishing these things to
be determined more fully, We say as much as regards the number of
tunics, that it is not licit to use more, unless in necessities, which
can happen in conformity with the rule, according to that which Our
predecessor of past memory has clarified more fully. We however say
that the cheapness of the vestments for the habits as well as that for
the interior tunics, should be understood to be that which according to
the custom or condition of the country ought to be reputed cheep in
value as regards both the color and the price of the cloth: for as
regards every region one cannot assign one determined measure in such
things. We have also said that the judgment of cheapness of this kind
must be committed to the Ministers and Custodes or Guardians,
responsible as they are with the consciences of their subjects
concerning this matter: however in the same way which they observe
cheapness in vestments, We relinquish in the same manner to the
judgment of their Ministers, Custodes and Guardians, for what necessity
the Friars themselves might wear footwear.

8. Next since two seasons have been noted in the rule, namely from the
Feast of All Saints up to the Nativity of the Lord, and Great Lent, in
which they are bound to fast, it may be inferred in the same rule: that
at other seasons, however, they are not bound to fast except Fridays:
and from this others have wished to say, that the said Friars of the
Order are not bound, except from becomingness to other fasts, as to the
former: We declare, that it ought to be understood that they are not
bound to fast at other seasons, except on fasts established by the
Church: for it does not have the semblance of truth, that either the
Institutor of the rule, or even the confirmer intended to absolve them
from observing those fasts, to which by the common statute of the
Church the rest of Christians are obliged.

9. Moreover when the said Saint wishing that the Friars above all
things be totally alien to coins or money, precepted firmly to all the
Friars, that in no manner they receive coins or money by themselves, or
through an interposed person: and clarifying that article, Our
predecessor, proposed cases and means, which when observed by the
Friars they might not be said to be (nor ought they themselves be, even
through another) receivers of money, against the rule or purity of
their Order. We say that the Friars are bound to beware exceedingly
that for other cases and under other means, which the declaration of
Our said predecessors propose, they do not have recourse to those
giving money or to deputed messengers, lest (if otherwise it would have
been attempted by them) they might deservedly be called transgressors
of the precept and the rule: for where something is generally
prohibited, which is not conceded expressly, it is understood that it
has been denied. Wherefore the every gain of money, and of offerings,
the reception of money in the church, or elsewhere, boxes or containers
assigned to receive the money of offerings or donations: and also even
whatever recourse to money, or the holding thereof, which by the
declaration itself is not conceded: these, We say, all these are simply
forbidden to them. Since even recourse to spiritual friends is
expressly conceded only in two cases according to the Rule: namely for
the necessities of the sick, and for the clothing of the Friars: and
piously and rationally having considered the necessity of life, Our
said predecessor often reckoned that it must be extended to other
necessities of the Friars occurring for a time (when [11]alms have
ceased) or even for emergencies: let the aforementioned Friars be
attentive, because for no other cases than the aforesaid or similar is
it licit for them to have recourse in the street or elsewhere to
friends of this kind, whether they be givers of money or self-appointed
persons, or messengers or depositors, or called by whatever other name:
even if the means conceded through the same declaration about money are
wholly preserved. Lastly since it is often repeated in the rule that
the same Confessor eagerly desired the professors of his rule to be
totally detached from the affection and desire for earthly goods, and
especially from money: it is necessary that the Friars vigilantly have
care, that when it arises from the aforesaid causes and means that they
have recourse to having money deputed for their own necessities, to
posses the same, whoever the principals or messengers be, in all things
they are to bear themselves in such a manner, that they show themselves
to all to have nothing inwardly to do with such moneys (just as they do
not posses them). Wherefore let the Friars know that precepting that
and in what manner money is expended, and exacting a computation of
expenses, or making deposits, carrying away a chest of money, or its
key, these acts and the like are illicit for them: for to do the
aforesaid things pertains to the owners alone, who have given them, and
to those whom the latter themselves have deputized for this very thing.

10. Hence since the holy man expressing the manner of poverty professed
in the rule said in the same: "The Friars are not to appropriate
anything to themselves, neither house, nor place, nor any thing: but as
pilgrims and foreigners in this age, in poverty and humility waiting
upon the Lord, let them go about confidently for [12]alms": and so it
stands declared by some of Our Predecessors the Roman Pontiffs, that
this expropriation ought to be understood as much in particular as also
in common, on account of which They receive in Their own name and that
of the Roman Church the property and dominion both of all the
concessions, offerings, and donations to the Friars (those things the
enjoyment of which and the use in fact of which certainly is licit to
the Order and to the Friars), it having been given over to the Friars
themselves in those things only to the extent of use in simple fact.
Those things had been conveyed to Our examination which in the Order
were said to be done, and seemed to be repugnant to the aforesaid vow
and the purity of the Order: clearly, I have established to pursue
these further according to the things themselves which We believe stand
in need of a remedy, that the heirs not only sustain but take care of
themselves: likewise that the Friars receive the annual returns
sometimes in a very notable quantity, on which thenceforth the
inhabitants of the convent live entirely: likewise that when business
is conducted even for temporal goods in the law courts, they attend
with lawyers and procurators, and present themselves personally in the
same matter to instigate them: likewise that they take up the execution
of last wills, and conduct them, and introduce themselves whenever
dispositions or restitutions are to be made concerning their use, or
worse, their removal: likewise that in some places they have not only
excessive gardens, but even great vineyards, from which much is
harvested from olive trees and grapevines to be sold: likewise that at
the seasons of grain and grape harvest so copiously are grain and wine
gathered by the Friars begging or selling other things, and both stored
up in cellars and granaries, with which throughout the remainder of the
year they can even pass their life without begging them: likewise that
they build churches or other buildings or take care to have them made
in quantity and curiosity of figure and form, and in a notably
excessive sumptuosity, so that they do not seem to be little dwellings
of the poor, but of magnates: they even have so many ecclesiastic
vestments in very many places, and so notably precious, that they
exceed the great church [13]cathedrals in these things: moreover they
receive indistinctly horses and arms offered to them in funerals:
however the community of the Friars and especially the rectors of the
Order itself asserted, that the aforesaid things, or many of them are
not done in the Order, that even if the things are discovered to be
such they are rigidly punished: and also that something be done against
such things, very many statutes in the Order have been made quite
strict from ancient times. Desiring therefore to provide for the
consciences of the Friars themselves, and to remove all doubts (as much
as is possible to Us) from their own hearts, We shall respond to the
aforesaid things, in order, which follow: For since it pertains to the
truth of life, that that which is done externally, present the interior
disposition and habit of mind: the Friars, who have withdrawn
themselves by such expropriation from temporal goods, have need to
abstain from every thing, which may be or might seem to be contrary to
the said expropriation. Therefore because in inheritances not only the
use of the thing, but even the dominion passes to the heirs in its
proper time: the aforementioned Friars however can acquire nothing for
themselves in particular, or for their Order, even in common: We say by
clarifying, that they are in no way capable of inheritances of this
kind, which even from their own nature extend indifferently to money,
and even to other mobile goods, and to immobile (having considered the
purity of their vow): nor is it licit to them to receive the value of
such hereditary goods, or so much as a part thereof, because this can
be presumed to become fraud, as if receiving under a manner and form of
a legacy that has been abandoned to them, or things so remitted: We
simply prohibit such things to them lest they thus become more
desirable. And since the annual returns among the immovable goods may
be appraised by law, and the possession of this kind of return is
repugnant to poverty and mendicancy, there is no doubting, that it is
not licit to the aforesaid Friars to receive or enjoy (their condition
having been considered) from the return whatever things as either
possessions or even the use thereof (when the concession to them is not
ascertained). Further, when not only because it is discerned to be
evil, but because it has ever species of evil, it must be especially
avoided by perfect men: however from such presentations and
instigations in the law courts, when concerning the affairs it is
pleaded that they be turned into their own advantage, they are truly
believed by those, who stand outside (concerning which men outside
enjoy to judge), that in the very affairs the by- standing Friars are
seeking something as their own: by no means should the professors of
this kind of vow and rule mix themselves up in such law courts, and
litigious acts: that they may both be thought well of by those who
stand outside, and satisfy the purity of their vow, the scandal of
neighbors in such a manner is to be avoided. But indeed since the
Friars of the said Order are to be strangers not only from reception,
propriety, dominion, or use of the money itself, but even from whatever
kind of handling of the same, and from these may they be entirely
strangers, just as Our said predecessor often said plainly in
clarifying this same rule: and since the said professors of the Order
cannot seek for any temporal thing before a judge, it is not licit to
the aforesaid Friars nor are they competent, nay rather more ably
having considered the purity of their own state they ought to know it
to be forbidden to themselves, since by executions and dispositions of
this kind they expose themselves, when more frequently they cannot
settle these without litigation and the handling or administration of
money. But however giving counsel in these things which must be
prosecuted is not opposed to their own state, since from this act which
concerns temporal goods no jurisdiction or action before a judge, or
dispensation is attributed to them.

11. Truly it is licit not only might it be licit, but even very
conformable to reason, that the Friars who are occupied assiduously in
the spiritual labors of prayer and study, have gardens and areas fit
for recollection or recreation of themselves, and sometimes to withdraw
themselves corporally after labors of this kind, and also to have the
necessary garden plots for themselves: To have however any gardens to
be cultivated, and olive trees and other garden plots to be sold for a
price, and also even vineyards, is repugnant to their rule and the
purity of the Order, according to what the said predecessor has
declared and even ordained: that if such things for nearly the same
said uses, as those considered a field or vineyard to be cultivated and
similar things are bequeathed as a legacy to the Friars, by every means
the Friars are to abstain from the reception of such things, since even
having the aforementioned things to enjoy price of harvest in their own
seasons, approaches the nature and form of profits. Again since the
aforesaid Saint, as much in the examples of his life, as in words of
his rule manifested that he wanted his Friars and sons by leaning upon
Divine Providence to cast themselves upon God, who pastures the birds
of heaven, which do not gather into barns, nor sow nor reap: it does
not have the semblance of the truth that he himself wanted them to have
granaries or cellars, when by daily begging they should hope to be able
to spend their life. And on that account they ought not from light fear
to loose themselves to gather and store up provisions in this manner:
but only when it might be more credible from what has been already
proven, that they could not otherwise find the necessaries of life.
This however We consider is to be left to the judgment of the Ministers
and Custodes, together and individually in their administrations and
custodies (with the counsel and assent of the Guardians and of two
discrete priests of the convent of the place and of the senior Friars
in the Order), for whose consciences they are especially responsible in
this matter. Hence it is that the whole rule cries aloud, that the holy
man wanted to found his Friars upon most high poverty and humility, in
respect equally to affection and to execution, just as in conduct: it
befits them, that in no manner they cause to be made one after another,
or support to be made churches or whatever other buildings, which
(having considered the number of Friars dwelling there) ought to be
reputed as excessive in multiplicity and size. And for that reason We
wish, that everywhere in their Order they be content with moderate and
humble buildings one after the other, lest the contrary to this so
great promise of poverty, which lies open to the eyes, be proclaimed
outside.

Although even the vestments and ecclesiastic vessels are ordained to
the honor of the Divine Name, on account of which God Himself does all
things: yet He who is the knower of things hidden, looks principally to
the soul those ministering to Him, not to their hands: nor does He wish
Himself to be served by those things which are discordant with the
condition and state of His ministers: for which reason they ought to
suffice themselves with vessels and decent ecclesiastic vestments,
suitably sufficient in number and size. A superfluity however or
exceeding preciousness, or whatever curiosity in these or whatever
other things cannot befit their profession or state: for since they
know these to be a treasuring up or abundance, they manifestly derogate
so great a poverty in respect to human judgment. Wherefore We wish and
command that the aforementioned things be observed by the Friars.
Indeed about the offerings of horses and arms We decree that that is to
be observed in all cases and by all, which by the aforesaid declaration
is known to have been limited to [14]alms of money.

12. From the aforementioned things however has grown up among the
Friars a not too less scrupulous question: clearly whether from their
profession of the rule they are obliged to a strict and tenuous or poor
use of things: by which certain ones of themselves believing and
saying, that just as regards dominion over things they have by vow the
strictest abdication, so it is imposed upon them as regards use the
greatest strictness and meagerness: by others on the contrary
asserting, that from their profession they are obliged to no poor use,
which is not expressed in the rule, it being licit that they are bound
to a use moderated by temperance, just as and more so from becomingness
than other Christians. And so wanting to take care to quiet the
consciences of the aforesaid Friars, and to put an end to these
altercations, We say by clarifying, that the Friars Minor from the
profession of their rule are especially obligated to the strict or poor
use of things, which is contained in their own rule: and by that manner
of obligation, under which the rule restricts or proposes such use of
things.

13. To say however just as some affirm to assert, that it is heretical,
to hold that poor use is included or not included under the vow of
evangelical poverty, We judge to be presumptuous and temerarious.

14. Finally because from that which the rule has said concerning those
by whom, and whither the election being undertaken of the Minister
General ought to be made, nothing is said concerning the election of
the Ministers Provincial, or of the arrangement lately mentioned, a
doubting could have arisen among the Friars over this matter: We
wishing them to be able clearly and securely to proceed in all their
undertakings: do declare, even decree and ordain in this constitution
the things that will have force in perpetuity, so that when any
Province will have to be provided with a Minister, let the election of
the Minister himself rest in the hands of the Provincial Chapter, which
same Chapter, on the day following that on which it had been assembled,
is bound to carry out. However the confirmation of the election itself
pertains to the Minister General, and if indeed an election of this
kind is proceeded to by written ballot, and the votes have been divided
in disagreement, let it happen that more elections be conducted to
settle the discord, let that which had been conducted by a majority of
the Chapter (which has enjoyed no contribution of jealousy or reward,
or respect for persons), not withstanding the limitation of whatever
other part thereof, be confirmed by the said Minister General with the
counsel of the discrete members of the Order (however before the ex
officio act, even as it pertains to him, a diligent examination is to
have been made), or even annulled: even as it will have appeared to him
according to God to expedite the matter: and if it will have been
annulled, an election of this kind reverts to the Provincial Chapter

15. Otherwise if the Provincial Chapter neglects to choose a Minister
on the aforesaid day: the day after the provision for the Minister
Provincial devolves freely to the Minister General. Indeed if to the
aforesaid Minister, and General Chapter on account of a certain and
reasonable cause, it seems sometimes in the provinces beyond the Irish
Sea, Greece, or Romania, in which, in as much as another manner of
providing is said from a certain and reasonable cause, to have been
observed, to procure a Minister Provincial, he is to be appointed by
the Minister General, with the more able counsel of virtuous members of
the Order, rather than by the election of the aforesaid Chapter: in the
Provinces of Ireland and even notwithstanding those overseas, indeed in
Romania, or Greece when the Minister of the said province dies, or is
dismissed on this side of the Sea; in the former case on the other hand
let there be observed without deceit, partiality, and fraud (upon whom
We place the responsibility for their consciences) that which
concerning it the said Minister with the counsel of the said virtuous
members will reckon to be arranged.

16. Indeed in the case of the lack of the said Minister Provincials We
wish to be observed, that which about this matter until now has been
observed by the Order itself. Otherwise if it might come to pass that
they lack a Minister General, let there be done by the Vicar of the
Order about this matter, what would have to be done by the same
Minister up until it is provided for by the Minister General.

17. Henceforth if something might perhaps happen to be attempted
differently concerning a Minister Provincial of this kind, that is ipso
facto invalid, and void.

Therefore it is in nowise licit to any man to infringe this page of Our
declarations, statements, composition, command, constitutions,
judgments, and dispositions, nor it is licit to such a one to oppose
this by rash daring: if any one however would presume to attempt this,
let him know that he has incurred the indignation of the Omnipotent
God, and his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.

- Pope Clement V. At Vienne, in the eighth year of his Pontificate.

