____________________

[9]Sermon Delivered on the Anniversary of His Consecration, by Pope Saint Leo
the Great

[10][Pope Saint Leo the Great] I. The LORD raises up the weak and gives
him grace according to his need. The Divine condescension has made this
an honourable day for me, for it has shown by raising my humbleness to
the highest rank, that He despised not any of His own. And hence,
although one must be diffident of merit, yet it is one's bounden duty
to rejoice over the gift, since He who is the Imposer of the burden is
Himself the Aider in its execution: and lest the weak recipient should
fall beneath the greatness of the grace, He who conferred the dignity
will also give the power. As the day therefore returns in due course on
which the LORD purposed that I should begin my episcopal office, there
is true cause for me to rejoice to the glory of GOD, Who that I might
love Him much, has forgiven me much, and that I might make His Grace
wonderful, has conferred His gifts upon me in whom He found no
recommendations of merit. And by this His work what does the LORD
suggest and commend to our hearts but that no one should presume upon
his own righteousness nor distrust GOD's mercy which shines out more
pre-eminently then, when the sinner is made holy and the downcast
lifted 116 up. For the measure of heavenly gifts does not rest upon the
quality of our deeds, nor in this world, in which "all life is
temptation," is each one rewarded according to his deserving, for if
the LORD were to take count of a man's iniquities, no one could stand
before His judgment.

II. The mighty assemblage of prelates testifies to men's loyal
acceptance of Peter in Peter's unworthy successor. Therefore,
dearly-beloved, "magnify the LORD with me and let us exalt His name
together," that the whole reason of to-day's concourse may be referred
to the praise of Him Who brought it to pass. For so far as my own
feelings are concerned, I confess that I rejoice most over the devotion
of you all; and when I look upon this splendid assemblage of my
venerable brother-priests I feel that, where so many saints are
gathered, the very angels are amongst us. Nor do I doubt that we are
to-day visited by a more abundant outpouring of the Divine Presence,
when so many fair tabernacles of GOD, so many excellent members of the
Body of Christ are in one place and shine with one light. Nor yet I
feel sure, is the fostering condescension and true love of the most
blessed Apostle Peter absent from this congregation: he has not
deserted your devotion, in whose honour you are met together. And so he
too rejoices over your good feeling and welcomes your respect for the
LORD'S own institution as shown towards the partners of His honour,
commending the well ordered love of the whole Church, which ever finds
Peter in Peter's See, and from affection for so great a shepherd grows
not lukewarm even over so inferior a successor as myself. In order
therefore, dearly beloved, that this loyalty which you unanimously
display towards my humbleness may obtain the fruit of its zeal, on
bended knee entreat the merciful goodness of our GOD that in our days
He will drive out those who assail us, strengthen faith, increase love,
increase peace and deign to render me His poor slave, whom to show the
riches of His grace He has willed to stand at the helm of the Church,
sufficient for so great a work and useful in building you up, and to
this end to lengthen our time for service that the years He may grant
us may be used to His glory through Christ our LORD. Amen.

