____________________

[8]Vehementer exultamus hodie - Bull of Canonization of Saint Therese of the
Child Jesus and the Holy Face, by Pope Pius XI, 17 May 1925

[9]Pope Pius XI Vehemently do We exult this day, and We are filled with
the greatest joy, because it is granted to Us who beatified the
daughter of Carmel -- Thérèse of the Child Jesus, and proposed her as a
model, to celebrate now her canonization, under the authority of Our
Lord Jesus Christ, of the holy Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and
under our own authority.

This Virgin, truly wise and prudent, walked in the way of the Lord in
the simplicity of her soul, and being made perfect in a short space,
fulfilled a long time. Thereafter while still in the flower of her
years, she was called to Paradise to receive the crown which her
heavenly Spouse had prepared for her. During her lifetime she was known
only to a few, but immediately after her saintly death her fame spread
abroad in marvellous fashion throughout the whole Christian world, on
account of the innumerable wonders wrought by Almighty God at her
intercession. Indeed, it seemed as if, in accordance with her dying
promise, she were letting fall upon earth a shower of Roses. Hence it
came to pass that Holy Church decided to bestow upon her the high
honors reserved for the Saints without observing the statutory delays.

The child was born at Alençon in the diocese of Séez, in France, on
January 2, 1873, of a father and amother remarkable for their piety --
Louis Stanislaus Martin and Marie Zélie Guérin. [ They were declared
Venerable on 26 March 1994.] On January 4 she was baptized, receiving
the name of Marie Françoise Thérèse.

Scarcely had she passed the age of four years and a half when she was
bereft of her mother, and so became a prey to the deepest sorrow. Her
education was thenceforth entrusted to her sisters, Marie and Pauline,
whom she strove to obey perfectly in all things, the while she lived
under the watchful care of her well-beloved father. Thanks to her
teachers, Thérèse hastened like a giant along the way to perfection.
From her earliest years it was her chief delight to talk frequently of
God, and she always kept before her mind the thought that she must not
inflict the slightest pain on the Holy Child Jesus.

Inspired by the Holy Spirit she longed to lead a most holy life and
promised earnestly that she would refuse God nothing He should seem to
ask of her, a resolution she endeavored to keep until death. As soon as
she had reached the age of nine she was given into the charge of the
[10]Benedictine nuns of Lisieux, with whom she spent the day, returning
home at nightfall. Though younger than the other scholars, she
outstripped them all in progress and piety, studying the mysteries of
our Faith with such zeal and insight that the chaplain of the convent
styled her his "theologian," or the "little doctor." As time passed she
learned by heart the whole of that admirable book, The Imitation of
Christ, while the Sacred Scriptures became so familiar to her, that in
her writings she used them aptly, frequently, and with authority.

In her tenth year, she was long afflicted by a mysterious and deadly
disease from which, as she herself narrates, she was freed through Our
Blessed Lady, to whom she had been making a novena under the invocation
of [11]Our Lady of Victories, and who appeared to her with a smile upon
her lips. Thereafter, filled with angelic fervor, she made her soul
ready for the sacred Banquet in which we partake of the Body of Christ.

As soon as she had tasted of the Eucharistic Bread, she felt an
insatiable hunger for that heavenly Food, and, as if inspired, she
begged of Jesus, her sole delight, to "change for her into bitterness
all human consolation." Then, all aflame with love for Christ and His
Church, she had a most keen desire to enter among the [12]Discalced
Carmelites, so that by her self-denial and continual sacrifices "she
might bring help to priests and missionaries and the entire Church,"
and might gain innumerable souls for Jesus Christ At the approach of
death she promised that when with God she would continue this work.

While yet but fourteen years old, on account of her tender age, she met
with serious opposition on the part of the ecclesiastical authorities
regarding her vocation to the cloister. These difficulties she
surmounted with a strength of soul well-nigh incredible, and in spite
of her natural shyness, she revealed her intention to our predecessor,
[13]Leo XIII of happy memory. The Pontiff remitted the matter to the
decision of the Superiors. though balked of her desire, and stricken
with grief, nevertheless she was perfectly submissive to the divine
will.

After this stern trial of her patience and her vocation, on the night
day of April 1888, with the approval of her Bishop, she entered the
[14]Carmelite Monastery of Lisieux. In Carmel God wonderfully trained
the heart of Thérèse, who, imitating the hidden life of Our Lady at
Nazareth, like a well-watered garden put forth the flowers of every
virtue, but most of all those of a burning love for God and most ardent
charity of her neighbor, inasmuch as she had thoroughly understood that
commandment of the Lord: "Love one another as I have loved you."

In order more and more to give pleasure to Jesus Christ, having dwelt
upon the invitation given in Scripture: "If anyone is little, let him
come unto Me," she desired to be a little one in spirit, and
thenceforth with a childlike and perfect trust she surrendered herself
entirely and for ever to God, as to a most loving Father. This way of
spiritual childhood, in keeping with the doctrine of the Gospel, she
taught to others, especially to the novices, whom out of obedience she
had undertaken to train in the exercise of the virtues of the religious
life, and then filled with a holy and apostolic zeal [by her writings]
she enthusiastically opened up the way of evangelical simplicity to a
world puffed up with pride, "loving vanity and searching after
falsehood."

Jesus, her Spouse, set her completely on fire with a longing to suffer
both in body and in soul. Realizing with the utmost sorrow how Divine
Love was on all sides forgotten, two years before her death she offered
herself wholeheartedly as a victim to "God's Merciful Love." Then, as
it is reported, she was wounded by a flaming dart, so that, consumed by
the divine fire, rapt in ecstasy, with the cry of "My God, I love
Thee!" upon her lips, she went to her reward at the age of twenty-four.
It was on September 30, 1897, that she took flight to her Spouse, and
thus, according to the well-known eulogy of Holy Scripture: "having
been made perfect in a short space, she fulfilled a long time."

The funeral rites were duly carried out, and she was buried in the
cemetery of Lisieux. From there her fame spread throughout the world
and her sepulcher became glorious. Scarcely had she entered Paradise
than she began to fulfill by innumerable miracles -- as she still
continues to fulfill -- her promise of sending down to earth a
perpetual shower of Roses, that is, of graces. The high esteem which
she enjoyed among those who knew her in life was wonderfully increased
after her death.

Urged by her great reputation for holiness, many [15]Cardinals,
Bishops, and Religious Superiors sent petitions to Pope [St.] Pius X,
begging that her cause of canonization would be introduced. the Holy
Father hearkened to the many prayers, and on the ninth of June, 1914,
signed the decree of the Commission of the Introduction of the Cause,
which was entrusted to the Postulator-General of the [16]Discalced
Carmelites, Reverend Father Rodrigo of Saint Francis of Paula.

The Process having been carried through its various stages, and the
heroic nature of the virtues practiced by Thérèse having been duly
inquired into, the General Congregation was held on August 2, 1921, in
presence of Pope Benedict XV. His Eminence, [17]Cardinal Vico, Ponent
of the Cause, submitted for discussion the question of the heroism of
the Servant of God in practicing the theological virtues of Faith,
Hope, and Charity, as also the [18]cardinal virtues of Prudence,
Fortitude, Justice, and Temperance. The [19]Cardinals and Consulters
present gave their vote, and after delaying in order to obtain further
light from God, Our Predecessor promulgated his decision on the eve of
the Assumption, to the effect that the Venerable Thérèse had practiced
the above virtues to an heroic degree.

So rapid and triumphant was the progress of the Cause that at once two
miracles were proposed for examination, chosen out of a multitude of
prodigies said to have been wrought throughout the Christian world by
the powerful intercession of the Venerable Thérèse. The first concerned
Sister Louise of Saint Germain, of the Daughters of the Cross, victim
of an organic disease, namely, a grave ulcer in the stomach, of
hemorragic nature. On having recourse to the intercession of Thérèse,
she was restored to perfect health, as three eminent doctors have
unanimously testified at the request of the Sacred Congregation of
Rites. The second miracle, somewhat similar to the first, was the cure
of the young seminarist, Charles Anne, victim of pulmonary haemoptysis,
of the cavitary stage. He confidently invoked the aid of the Servant of
God and was perfectly cured. This is clear from the testimony of the
three doctors, and from the reasons on which they based their
decisions.

After the Antepreparatory and Preparatory Congregation, the General
Congregation, on January 30, 1923, discussed in our presence the
miraculous nature of three cures. According to custom, We reserved our
decision in order to obtain further assistance from God, and on
Quinquagesima Sunday, February 11, 1923, Feast of the Apparition of Our
Lady at Lourdes, and eve of the first anniversary of our coronation, We
decided to make it known. In the presence of [20]Cardinal Vico, Prefect
of the Congregation of Rites, and others of its members, We solemnly
declared the above instantaneous and complete cures to be beyond doubt
miraculous, and We gave orders for the promulgation of a Decree to that
effect.

Shortly after, on March 6, [21]Cardinal Vico, at another general
reunion of the Congregation of Rites, put the question: "The virtues of
the Venerable Servant of God and the two miracles required having been
formally recognized, can the [22]beatification safely be proceeded
with?" The decision was unanimously in the affirmative. After a brief
delay, on the Feast of Saint Joseph, We solemnly declared that in all
safety Sister Thérèse of the Child Jesus could receive the honors of
[23]beatification, and We ordained the publication of the Brief for the
ceremony in the Vatican Basilica. In the same Patriarchal Basilica of
the Prince of the Apostles amid an outpouring of universal joy, the
Servant of God became Blessed Thérèse.

Hearing of the fresh prodigies accomplished by Thérèse of the Child
Jesus, We commissioned the Sacred Congregation of Rites on July 27,
1923, to take up anew the Cause of the Beata. On July 11, 1924, We
ratified a decree of the Sacred Congregation which declared that the
examinations in the dioceses of Parma [Italy] and Malines
[[24]Belgium], concerning miracles attributed to Blessed Thérèse were
valid processes.

Gabriella Trimusi, who at the age of twenty-three had entered the
Convent of the Poor Daughters of the Sacred Heart in Parma, began in
1913 to suffer in her left knee. She was in the habit of breaking the
firewood across her knee, and this caused a lesion at the joint which
prepared the way for a tuberculous infection. The trouble began with a
dull pain, then the knee became swollen, and finally loss of appetite
brought about emaciation. She was attended by two physicians, but
without success, so that three years later she was sent to Milan, where
injections, sunbaths, and various other forms of treatment were tried
in vain; at the end of four years the spine itself became affected. The
invalid returned to Parma, where several doctors diagnosed it as a case
of tuberculous lesion, and prescribed general remedies. A radiograph of
the knee revealed at this period the existence of periostitis at the
head of the tibia. Taken to the hospital, she was once more subjected
to X-rays, but while there was attacked by Spanish influenza, and began
to suffer fresh and constantly increasing pain in the vertebral column.
All remedies proving ineffective, she was recommended by a priest on
June 13, 1923, to join in a public novena in honor of Blessed Thérèse.
She joined in the prayers, more concerned, however, over the health of
the other nuns than her own. The close of the novena coincided with the
close of a triduum in a neighboring Carmel, and several of the nuns --
Gabriella among the rest -- sought permission to attend the ceremony.
On her return, after slowly and painfully effecting the short journey,
she entered the chapel of the Community, where the others were already
assembled. The Superioress exhorted her to pray with confidence, and
bade her go to her place. Strange to say, the invalid knelt down
unconsciously on her knee without feeling the slightest pain, nor did
she realize what she had done, on account of the increase of suffering
at the moment in the spine. She next went to the refectory with others,
and, the meal finished, slowly mounted the stairs. Going into the first
room she saw, she took off the apparatus she wore to support the spine,
and cried out loudly: "I am cured, I am cured!"

Sister Gabriella Trimusi returned at once to her labors and the
exercises of religious life, without either pain or fatigue. The
doctors appointed by the Sacred Congregation discussed the miracle at
great length, and decided that the lesion at the knee was chronic
arthrosynovitis and the spinal trouble was chronic spondulitis. These
two lesions, rebellious to all other treatment, yielded to God's power,
and Sister Gabriella by a miracle recovered the health which she still
enjoys.

The story of the second miracle is more brief. In October 1919, Maria
Pellemans was a victim of pulmonary tuberculosis, and this was followed
by gastritis and enteritis, both of them likewise of a tuberculous
nature. She was medically attended at home, then in a sanatorium. In
August 1920, she went to Lourdes, but all to no purpose. In March,
1923, she accompanied a small band of pilgrims to Lisieux, and while
kneeling at the tomb of the Blessed Thérèse she was suddenly restored
to perfect health. Three specially appointed doctors made a favorable
report to the Sacred Congregation on both miracles.

In these cures, the reality of the miraculous nature admitted of no
doubt whatsoever, indeed it shone with unwonted splendor on account of
the special circumstances in which the prodigies occurred.

For that reason, on [25]17 March [26]1925, in a General Congregation,
[27]Cardinal Vico sought the verdict of the [28]Cardinals and
Consulters, based on the unanimous decision of the medial experts.

We ourselves reserved our opinion until [29]March 19, Feast of Saint
Joseph, when in the presence of the [30]Cardinal Prefect and other
dignitaries of the Sacred Congregation of Rite We solemnly proclaimed
the two cures to be of a certainty miraculous. On March 29, after
having received the unanimous vote of the [31]Cardinals and the
Consulters, We solemnly declared the Canonization of the Blessed
Thérèse could be proceeded with in safety.

After all these preliminaries, in order to comply with the
prescriptions laid down by our Predecessors, and to enhance the
splendor of the august ceremony, We convoked a Secret Consistory of the
[32]Cardinals on March 30, to ask their advice on the question of the
solemn canonization.

[33]Cardinal Vico spoke eloquently on the life and miracles of Blessed
Thérèse of the Child Jesus, and warmly begged that she be raised to the
highest honors. Each of the [34]Cardinals expressed his opinion on the
matter in question. On April 2 We held a Public Consistory, at which
after an able discourse by the Consistorial advocate, John Gusco, all
the [35]Cardinals exhorted Us to give a final decision. We, however,
invited by special letters not merely the neighboring Bishops, but also
those most remote to come to Us and pronounce their opinion. Many came
from various countries, and on April 22 took part in a semi-public
Consistory, after having acquainted themselves -- by means of an
abridgment -- with the life and miracles of the Beta, and all the
process gone through by the Congregation of Rites. Patriarchs,
Archbishops, and Bishops united themselves to the [36]Cardinals, urging
upon Us to celebrate this canonization.

We therefore decided to celebrate it on [37]May 17, in the Vatican
Basilica, and exhorted the faithful to redouble their prayers, both for
their own spiritual benefit and for our guidance by the Spirit of God.

On this most happy and desired day, the secular and regular clergy of
Rome, the Prelates and Officials of the Curia, and finally all the
Patriarchs, Bishops and Abbots then in the Eternal City gathered in the
Vatican Basilica, the same being magnificently decorated. We ourselves
brought up the rear of the procession. Then our Venerable Brother,
Anthony [38]Cardinal Vico, after a speech by Virgil Jacoucci,
Consistorial advocate, set forth to Us the desire of the Episcopate,
and the Order of [39]Discalced Carmelites, that We should place among
the Saints Blessed Thérèse of the Child Jesus, whom already We had
proclaimed the patroness of the Missions and Noviciates of the Order. A
second and third time they renewed their petition. Then after earnest
prayers for light: "In honor of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, for the
glory of the Catholic Faith, by the authority of Jesus Christ, of Peter
and Paul, and by our own authority, after mature deliberation and at
the request of the [40]Cardinals, Patriarchs and Bishops, We declared
that the professed nun of the Order of Discalced Carmelites, Thérèse of
the Child Jesus, was a Saint and was to be inscribed in the calendar of
the Saints, memory of her to be kept on October the third of each year.
[With the change of the liturgical calendar, Saint Thérèse's feast day
was moved to October 1st .] Finally, We returned fervent thanks to God
for so great a favor, celebrated the Holy Sacrifice, granted a Plenary
[41]Indulgence, and ordained the publication of the Decree, to be
signed by all the [42]Cardinals and by ourselves.

Today, faithful flock of Christ, the Church offers a new and most noble
model of virtue for all of you to contemplate unceasingly. For the
peculiar characteristic of the sanctity to which God called Thérèse of
the Child Jesus lies chiefly in this, that having heard the Divine call
she obeyed with the utmost promptness and fidelity. Without going
beyond the common order of things, in her way of life she followed out
and fulfilled her vocation with such alacrity, generosity, and
constancy that she reached an heroic degree of virtue. In our own day,
when men seek so passionately after temporal goods, this young maiden
lived in our midst practicing in all simplicity and devotedness the
Christian virtues in order to honor God and to win eternal life. May
her example strengthen in virtue and lead to amore perfect life, not
only the cloistered souls but those living in the world.

In our present needs let us all invoke the patronage of Saint Thérèse
of the Child Jesus, that by her intercession a shower of Roses, that
is, of the graces we require, may descend upon us. All of which We
solemnly affirm out of the fullness of the Apostolic authority, and if
anyone contravene our Decree -- he shall incur the wrath of God and of
Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Given in Rome, at Saint Peter's, May 17,
1925, in the fourth year of our Pontificate, I, Pius, Bishop of the
Catholic Church, et cetera.

