**Word & Song by Anthony Esolen**

ETERNAL: Word of the Week Oct 20, 2025

by Anthony Esolen

I remember a moment from my freshman class in Moral Philosophy, at
Princeton, taught by a very nice man, one T. M. Scanlon, who I don’t
think believed in anything religious. This was near the beginning of
the term, and he was introducing us to Aristotle’s Ethics, and he said,
because of what Aristotle believed about human nature, “I don’t suppose
anybody believes in the soul anymore.” Silence. Now that I look back on
it, I’ll bet there were still quite a few students in that class who
attended Sunday services, or Jewish kids who had not had their faith in
God scrubbed entirely away. But nobody said a word. I didn’t, either. I
was very shy, and I don’t think I volunteered a single word in any of
the lectures for the four classes I took that semester (the other three
were Linear Algebra with the math majors, Chemistry, and Introduction
to Politics). So I got the idea, and it was an easy one to come up
with, that atheism was the default at Princeton. And yet — something
wholly unexpected happened, even at Princeton, of all places.
It was the spring semester of my sophomore year. I was going to sign up
for a course in Shakespeare, at the departmental level — Shakespeare
for English majors. There were two to choose from. Both professors got
good reviews from the reliable Princeton Course Guide. It was a tossup.
I’m not sure what moved me to choose Professor Thomas P. Roche, Jr.,
but I did — and that changed my life. For the first time, I became
aware of the Christian intellectual life, spanning two thousand years,
and then I felt what John Keats felt when he first read Homer in
Chapman’s translation. It really was like walking up to the top of a
mountain and seeing the Pacific Ocean before you, when you had no idea
beforehand that there was such a thing. And that’s when I first
learned, among countless other things, about eternity, or its
adjective, our Word of the Week, eternal.

Professor Roche brought up Saint Augustine quite frequently and with
approval, and that led me to go to the campus bookstore, to buy a copy
of Confessions. I can say with complete honesty that if it weren’t for
that book, I wouldn’t be here. Now I appreciate the biographical part
of Confessions, but at that time, in my youth, when I guess I didn’t
think I had much to confess, I was enthralled instead by the four final
books, on form, matter, change, identity, memory, time, and eternity.
“What is time?” asks Augustine. If no one asks the question, he says,
he knows what time is, but as soon as someone does ask it, he no longer
knows. Time is bound up with change, and so it is that to ask, “What
was God doing before he made the world?” makes no sense, since time is
just one of the creatures that God has made. There was no “time” before
the created universe, because God had not yet created time. God’s
eternity is above and outside of time; he sees all things in his own
eternal presence. For an analogy — and it is just an analogy — think of
an author of a novel, and imagine that you are a character in the world
and the time of that novel. You are inside the book, and the time of
the book carries you along, but the author is not subject to the
novel-time he has created. For him, in his all-encompassing plan, the
last chapter is no farther away than the first. For him, they exist
simultaneously.

Now then, let’s continue the analogy, and suppose that the novel is
still incomplete. Suppose you were a character in that novel, and that
you were made immune from dying. Your life would go on indefinitely.
You would live perpetually, but that would still not be eternal life,
because it would just be the same kind of life we have now, only
without a stopping point. You’d still be in the novel, carried along by
time just as anyone else is. It’s not the length of your days on earth
that brings you closest to God’s eternity. It is your memory —
something perhaps even more mysterious than time.

I’ll grant that it’s hard to express this eternity in poetic form. The
Scriptures are pretty chaste about it, but also suggestive. God has set
his glory above the heavens: and that means above even those signs in
the skies by which we measure time. For “in the beginning God made the
heavens and the earth,” and that suggests that time begins only when
God wills it to be so, for there was evening and there was morning, one
day — the oneness of the first day echoing the oneness of God who made
it. “Heaven and earth shall pass away,” says Jesus, and that includes
everything in the universe, “but my words shall not pass away.” How
man, resurrected into life eternal, will experience this mode of being,
this City of God, I do not know, because it has not been revealed, but,
as Saint John says, “we shall be like Him, because we shall see Him as
He is.”

The word itself is fascinating. The -ternal part of it is just a
suffix. It’s the e- that contains the root, which comes from the
ancient Indo-European root aiw-, for the force of life, long life, and
the everlasting. It shows up all over the daughter limbs of the great
tree. In Greek, it gives us aiei, always; also aion (English eon,
borrowed from the Greek) for an age, especially if it is long or
indeterminate, so that the phrase aion aionion is typically translated
as for ever and ever. In Latin it gives us the noun aevum, roughly the
same as Greek aion, so that aevum aevorum means, literally, the age of
ages, also forever. In Welsh, with the Celtic cousin of the same word,
you get oes oesoedd, same sort of phrase, and same idea. In German, you
get the adjective ewig, meaning everlasting, which then becomes the
foundation for the noun Ewigkeit, “everhood,” so to speak — eternity.
English ever is also a cousin, as is another word that’s often
mispronounced because it’s spelled exactly like a completely different
word to which it is not related. That’s the word aye, from Old Norse
ei, pronounced like the letter A and not like the letter I, when it
means “always,” as in the archaic phrase you see sometimes in hymns and
in early Modern English works: “for aye,” meaning forever.
