**Dinner at Eight (1933) Directed by George Cukor**

*Anthony Esolen Oct 16, 2025*

Our Film of the Week, Dinner at Eight, comes before the Hays Code,
which I believe — for artistic reasons and not just for moral reasons —
ushered in the Golden Age of Hollywood, from 1935 to about 1965. You
see, it’s a lot harder to be funny, for instance, when you don’t have
sleazy stuff to fall back on, than when you do, but you end up
discovering that you become more intelligent and more humorous
precisely because you’ve eliminated the easy way out. Then you have to
rely not on snark and flippancy but on what is perennially comic,
because it gets at the heart of the human condition. As I’ve said
before, as soon as you say, “There once was a man and a woman,” you’re
already approaching the land of high comedy, because right there you’ve
got those wonderful contradictions and misunderstandings and somehow
love winning out right through it.
Dinner at Eight, as I said, came before the Code, and I’ve no doubt
that the Hollywood censors — it was, after all, Hollywood making sure
of itself, with pressure put on Hollywood from the owners of theaters,
not to mention many socially-minded groups right across the political
spectrum — would have snipped out some of the lines, and very possibly
the most tragic action in the film. I won’t identify that action here,
because it would be a real spoiler. Nevertheless, Dinner at Eight is a
deeply moral film, I believe, though you have to look past — which you
are meant to do — the social ambience that it portrays, a high society
that is like some special bit of French cuisine that’s been left out
too long and has a queasy smell to it. But let me set the scene and
describe the characters!

Mrs. Oliver Jordan (Billie Burke — you will know her at once as the
Good Witch, from The Wizard of Oz) is planning a perfect dinner
party. Her husband, Mr. Jordan (Lionel Barrymore, before a broken hip,
exacerbated by terrible arthritis, left him in 1938 unable to walk), is
the head of a shipping company that’s hit the skids. It is the
Depression, after all. When Mr. Jordan tells businessman Dan Packard
(Wallace Beery) that he wants to sell the company, Packer pretends not
to be interested, but begins playing vulgar, ambitious, and shady deals
on the quiet. Packard’s wife (a very young Jean Harlow) is, as they
used to say, “no better than she should be.” She plays very silly,
selfish, and femininely vulgar social-climber, who dislikes her
husband, treats her maid badly, and conducts an affair on the side with
her physician, Dr. Talbot. He’s married too, and his wife knows about
his tawdry side. The guests of honor for the dinner party are a Lord
and Lady Ferncliffe, snobs from abroad whom Mrs. Jordan wants to
impress with an expensive and elegant feast with particular guests she
has invited for the occasion. The Jordans have a daughter, Paula (Madge
Evans), who is engaged to a decent but somewhat shallow young man,
while she’s really in love with a has-been actor, thrice-divorced, vain
and selfish and nearly broke Larry Renault (played to brittle
perfection by John Barrymore, Lionel’s brother). And there is one more
person on the guest list: faded actress Carlotta Vance (Marie
Dressler), a wise but not exactly saintly woman who in her youth had
turned down Oliver Jordan’s proposal of marriage. All these people are
invited to Mrs. Jordan’s DINNER AT EIGHT, a week from when the film
begins.

What could possibly go wrong?

From what I’ve said, you might think that Dinner at Eight is a comedy.
The film has comic moments, for certain. Billie Burke is perfect for
the role of the somewhat breathless and scatterbrained socialite. But
it is not a comedy. The film reveals to us strange depths in the human
characters we’re apt to think we know everything about. They surprise
us. These aren’t surprises that Hollywood would understand now, because
they don’t come with shouting, slashing, special effects, over-writing,
and much worse. In Dinner at Eight the surprises come subtly, without
any accompanying music, and often with the merest look in the eye, a
look that tells us we’re seeing human beings here and not caricatures.
I suppose you might say, without the slightest bit of sentimentality —
and without winking at the characters’ moral failings and their
personal shortcomings, which are sometimes severe — that the screenplay
writers and the director, George Cukor ask us not to give up on them,
not to think we can easily peg them as types and be done. Want to see a
mystery? Look at your next-door neighbor!
Will there be a true feast at the end of the film? That Dinner at
Eight? Watch and see, and once you’ve done that, please comment,
because this one’s really prime for some good conversation.

Word & Son by Anthony Esolen is a reader-supported online magazine
devoted to reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true. To receive
our posts and to help us continue this work, join us as subscriber.
