**Sonnet 14: "If thou dost love me, let it be for nought"**

*Elizabeth Barret Browning, from Sonnets from the Portuguese, 1850*

*Anthony Esolen Oct 22, 2025*

Our Word of the Week, eternal, leads us naturally in the
direction of love. Let’s think of this. I used to have fun with my
students, asking the girls if they would accept a marriage proposal
from a super-rationalist I named Irving, and provided with the voice of
a self-satisfied prig. Suppose then that Irving said to you, “I can say
with reasonable certainty that I love you, and it is likely, given
actuarial expectations, that I shall love you for the remainder of my
life, though I cannot account for the probability if some breakthrough
in medicine should lengthen us out for another ten or fifteen years.
That, however, seems improbable, so there is no rational argument for
turning me down, at least on this account.” Wouldn’t you look at him as
if he simply did not know what he was talking about, when he used the
word “love”?

Love isn’t a calculator, or, as Shakespeare says, “Love’s not Time’s
fool.” We know that some animals mate for life: wolves do, and so do
coyotes, as scraggly and woebegone as they look to our eyes. Many birds
do so: the bright and bold Mr. Cardinal and Mrs. Cardinal, for example.
But with man, it’s different. That’s because we’re partly detached from
time. We rise above it when we recollect, and we see all our past life
as fulfilled in the love to which we give our lives. Why, Debra and I
were jesting about it just this morning — if she hadn’t disliked open
spaces so much, if it hadn’t been for my bum leg, and all kinds of
apparently trivial things, we might never have met! But it’s more than
that, infinitely more. Our lives take all their meaning from our love,
and that survives, in an earthly sense, in our children, but we also
believe that our love is a gift from God, in whom nothing is lost. If
you say that all the world was created so that this young man and this
young woman, this John and this Sarah, were to unite in marriage and
love one another till death and even beyond, you would be approaching
the center of all things.

Our author today, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, gives the lie to the
canard that to be a great artist you have to lead a miserable life —
she and her husband Robert loved each other as warmly and closely and
fully as any man and woman ever have. After all, he had whisked her out
of her unhappy life in London, kept in a sort of straitjacket, she and
her siblings, by their pathologically controlling father. She was never
in very good health, but that didn’t make Robert impatient; he loved
her all the more, the more he had to care for her. How much might we
give to have been with the Brownings when they lived in Italy, in that
dry climate, for the sake of Elizabeth’s health, and there they met and
befriended the Hawthornes from America, Nathanael and Sophia — another
couple deeply in love, and that certainly didn’t hurt Nathanael’s
genius one bit.

Now then, in our sonnet today, Elizabeth begs Robert not to love her
for anything she possesses, or for anything that is at all subject to
time. That includes even his own loving care for her, and his pity when
he wiped the tears from her eyes, because that pity too is ironically
subject to change, because she grows joyful under his care — and then
what’s left to pity? We may well like such things. If I think of the
small town where I grew up, when it endures changes that wear away what
I used to know, and essentially becomes a completely different place,
it doesn’t move me in the same way, if it moves me at all. But persons
aren’t like that. Each person is a world of meaning, an abyss of
mystery. To love a person is to rise above the river of change. Isn’t
it why we enjoy looking at pictures of the person we love when they
were little children, long before we met? I have more pictures of the
little Debra than she has of the little me, but any such picture is
something to cherish, because when you love, you love the whole person,
all of his or her life, and beyond life, too.

So in our Poem of the Week, Elizabeth asks Robert to do what in
fact he did: to love her for the sake of love. She doesn’t mean that as
a tautology. We are in the precincts of the divine. We take our
toddling steps, led by love, from time and change, toward eternity.

*Word & Song by Anthony Esolen is an online magazine devoted to
reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true. We publish essays
each week, on words, classic hymns, poems, films, and popular songs, as
well weekly podcasts on a wide variety of topics. Paid subscribers
receive audio-enhanced posts, on-demand access to our full archive, and
may share comments.*

::
    If thou must love me, let it be for nought
    Except for love’s sake only. Do not say
    I love her for her smile ... her look ... her way
    Of speaking gently, ... for a trick of thought
    That falls in well with mine, and certes brought
    A sense of pleasant ease on such a day’—
    For these things in themselves, Belovèd, may
    Be changed, or change for thee,—and love, so wrought,
    May be unwrought so. Neither love me for
    Thine own dear pity’s wiping my cheeks dry,—
    A creature might forget to weep, who bore
    Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby!
    But love me for love’s sake, that evermore
    Thou may’st love on, through love’s eternity.

