Word & Song by Anthony Esolen

Hymn of the Week: "Jerusalem the Golden" by Bernard of Cluny (12th century)

Anthony Esolen, Oct 14, 2025

How do you know when you’ve got an age that’s decadent? Is it when
satires are everywhere, because people lash out against dishonesty and
folly and luxury (that was once a bad word — and maybe that should be
our Word of the Week one of these days)? Or is it when satires are
unknown, because everybody’s gone numb to those things? Hard to tell,
right? The author of the poem that gave us our Hymn of the Week,
“Jerusalem the Golden,” was a Benedictine monk called Bernard of Cluny.
He’s most famous for his poem, De Contemptu mundi, On Contempt for the
World, and if you think Geoffrey Chaucer had a tart tongue for abuses
of power and shameless women and millers who lay a heavy thumb on the
scale so as to give less flour to their customers than they’ve paid
for, and if you think that Jonathan Swift was fired by what’s called
savage indignation, Bernard of Cluny doesn’t yield an inch to either of
them. But believe it or not, it’s from this same poem that we get our
celebratory hymn! I guess if you live in Graft City all your life,
you’ll long all the more ardently for the true city of peace, Jerusalem
above. And yet, how do we know that the Graft City of Bernard’s time
was worse than the same place in ours? Because he lashed out against
it? Maybe it’s the reverse. We don’t know. I mean this: If you’ve got a
monk down the road who is calling out your wickedness and who gives
some eye-popping descriptions of the Place Down Below, you might end up
restraining yourself a bit. You might even fall to your knees and say,
“I shall arise and go to my father’s house.” After all, there will be a
great feast at the father’s house, instead of starving in the far
country, no matter how much worldly food you stuff yourself with.

In any case, Bernard’s heart isn’t with criticizing this world, but
rather with praising the golden city and longing for it, because that’s
where the feasting is going to be. Now then, Edward Caswall, the
translator, and a writer of hymns on his own part, was a satirist too —
at least when he was young, and he wrote a parody of Aristotle, on the
Art of Pluck, that is, on the art of getting through your university
education while remaining utterly ignorant. Caswall, my friend, thou
shouldst be living at this day! Of course, since we’re talking about
the 19th century here and England, you’ve got to be familiar with Latin
and Greek to get all the jokes. So he says that when a student of Pluck
comes upon the sentence in Livy, Hannibal transivit Alpes summa
diligentia, meaning “Hannibal crossed the Alps as fast as he could,” he
renders it, “Hannibal crossed the Alps on top of a diligence” — a
French stagecoach! File that under the category, Grammarians Have Their
Fun Too.
Now, the Church had taken some lines from Bernard’s satire and turned
them into an Office hymn, Urbs Sion aurea, Sion the Golden City, and
that’s what Caswall translated, appending to it a translation of two
lines that appear much later, to bring the hymn to a better conclusion.
That was clever of him, but then, Caswall was quite a capable poet and
translator. He was also a minister of the Church of England, though he
did swim the Tiber to become Roman Catholic, he and his wife, following
the lead of John Henry Newman, with whom Caswall was a very close
collaborator. Some years after his wife passed away, Caswall was
ordained a priest, but our hymn today can well be sung by all
Christians, in all communions and denominations.

Give the Gift of Word & Song

The hymn is all about fullness and feasting and peace — peace not as a
negative, not as the absence of war, but as a full and living and
joyful order. The ancient Hebrews, who lived in that semi-arid land of
much heat, and streams that go dry in summer, and the precious artesian
wells of “living water,” meaning water that flows rather than standing
and gathering disease — they would naturally, we’d suppose, long like
the deer for cooling streams, and would naturally hope for full
harvests, but that, I think, didn’t really make them different from
everyone else. For the desert comes in many a form, after all, as does
famine, which you can suffer even when your belly is full. Honey was
the sweetest food they ever knew, but then, for that intense sweetness
united with genuine flavor, do we know anything better? Feasting is for
triumph, too, and people who don’t bother to fight won’t know the joy
of victory; that’s not a punishment, but just what it means to resign.
Who will know the greatest joy of coming home, but those who have
turned their hearts homeward, and set forth against all temptations to
give in or never to set out to begin with? It’s a solemn hymn, and the
melody we sing it to, Ewing (after the composer, Alexander Ewing), is
stately, but make no mistake, it is meant to instill in us an
ever-growing eagerness for that ultimate homeland, and the wedding
feast of the Lamb.

Word & Song by Anthony Esolen reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true
