HOTEL

Word of the Week

Anthony Esolen
Oct 06, 2025

Today you’ll have to forgive us for today’s audio “special effects.”
Tony made two tries at recording, and at the very end of the second
“take,” Molly decided that SHE had something important to say. Alas.

When was the first time I ever stayed in a hotel — our Word of the
Week? I think I was 15, and the place was Kingston, Ontario. My family
was on vacation with my Aunt Diane and Uncle Joe and their kids. If
that was in fact the first time, I can fix the date as August 19, 1974,
because the day after that we drove on over to Montreal, and mostly at
my own instigating, we caught a ballgame at old Jarry Park, between the
last-place Expos and the last-place Padres. Why you’d bother to do that
when you were in Montreal, I can’t say, but I remember the ballgame
because Willie McCovey hit a home run that night, and the Padres won.
So I find, from my go-to baseball website, that it was August 20, 1974.
Anyway, people who grew up when I did, and where I did, in northeastern
Pennsylvania, didn’t go on big vacations all the time. There were three
reasons for that. The first is that people couldn’t afford it. The
second is that when you did drive to places, you went to visit your
aunts and uncles and cousins, and you had a lot of them. We went to
Seaside Heights in New Jersey, but that was because my other Uncle Joe
was at Fort Dix with his wife and four kids, and we stayed with them.
Debra used to go to upstate New York all the time, to visit her Aunt
Ruthie and Uncle Willard and their five kids on the farm, and from
there they went now and again to Kingston or the Thousand Islands.
The third reason was that you didn’t have to go so far to find
amusement. There were Mom-and-Pop amusement parks, miniature golf
courses, bowling alleys, movie theaters, lakesides with arcades and big
concession stands, and suchlike. Most of these are gone. In Carbondale,
a few miles from my town, there was the old Irving Theater, with a
stage, a balcony, box seats in the loge, fancy woodwork, and, of
course, popcorn and candy and soda. Closer to us in the other direction
was the Favini Theater, after the immigrant Favini family that owned
and operated it. I find that there was a Wurlitzer organ there in 1926,
for vaudeville shows perhaps, or for theater music to accompany silent
films — I can’t say. When I was a small boy, my mother or one of my
aunts would drive me and my cousins Bobby and Frankie to the Favini to
catch the latest Jerry Lewis movie. We’d call her up when the movie was
over and we were ready to come home. No surveillance, no cell phones,
no worry. In our county we had a great amusement park called Rocky Glen
— nothing of it remains but a broken portion of one sign on a disused
road. Nearby in the next county there was a big lake that had several
carnival-style rides — Newton Lake. It’s now just private residences;
no park. My mother and father met for the first time at a place the
like of which doesn’t exist anymore. It was Chapman Lake, and when we
used that name, we weren’t talking only about the water. We were
talking about the beach, the concession stand with great pizza, the
Skee-ball in the arcade, and so on. People do like to have fun, and in
those days they had a lot of it nearby, in public places, outdoors, and
at little cost.
On that vacation we stayed at places like the Holiday Inn or Howard
Johnson’s, back when those were places for families. Of course they had
outdoor swimming pools, and you couldn’t keep me out of them before
breakfast. On one of those days, my Uncle Joe, who is a very tall and
big-boned man, gaped in wonder at a sort of triple breakfast I was
having (I think I grew nine inches that year), and said, “How is it
possible!” But I do remember once when we were in southern
Pennsylvania, just having gone to Hershey Park, which I don’t think we
actually enjoyed, because it was too noisy, too big, too expensive,
with lines too long, we were driving east on Route 30 towards where
Aunt Diane and Uncle Joe lived, and we went past a place called
Fogelsanger’s Hotel. Everybody was tired and a bit grumpy, and we were
ready to stay somewhere, anywhere, but my mother said, “Fogelsanger’s
Hotel?” So we kept going — and found no place to stay until we got to
Aunt Diane’s house in the middle of the night, all the way to one of
the suburbs of Philadelphia. We’d tease Mom about Fogelsanger’s for a
long time after that.

Upgrade to Paid

There’s a method to my madness here. In times before our own, you took
some risk going out on the road. What if the wagon wheel breaks on a
stone? What if a storm comes up and you’re stranded in the middle of
nowhere, with nothing to eat or drink? What if you lose your way? What
if you’re traveling far off to meet your family, and your money starts
to run out? What if you lose your wallet? Or what if you are like
Abraham and his kin and their flocks, and you are sojourning from Ur of
the Chaldees far upriver to Haran and your kinfolk there, but then west
and south from Haran into Canaan and even into Egypt? Everywhere you
go, there are people with their own flocks, and that’s often going to
require some sensitive negotiation. What if you are Odysseus, without
even a scrap of clothing, washed up on the coast of Phaeacia, and you
need help to get home? Or if you are Beowulf, traveling to Denmark to
win fame and honor by defeating the monster Grendel, and the coast
guard eyes you and your troops and their weapons with quite
understandable suspicion?
You see, the guest is sacred because he is vulnerable. That’s the law
of xenia in ancient Greece: the beggar and the stranger, who are often
one and the same, come from Zeus, and they must be treated well. If
they are not, who would dare to go anywhere? All trade must grind to a
halt — and yes, there was plenty of trade in the ancient world. Greece
couldn’t produce enough grain to feed the people, so they traded in
olive oil, wine, and fancy pottery. The men of Tyre and Sidon, and then
their colony Carthage (which means New Town, so that the Roman city
Nova Carthago, modern Cartagena, in Spain, meant New New Town), sailed
to Britain for tin and caravanned over the Sahara for gold. Now we have
hotels, and hostels — which is just the same word, from when the French
hadn’t yet ceased to pronounce the s coming before t (see Latin stella,
but French étoile, star), and other places of hospitality, from Latin
hospitalis, a compound of hostis, guest, and potis, capable.

Give the Gift of Word & Song

Here’s an important consideration, though. The relationship of host and
guest entails mutual duties. For the host is at some expense, and he
leaves himself vulnerable too, because, after all, he doesn’t know who
his guest is. So when the young Paris absconded from Sparta with
Menelaus’ wife Helen, he was violating the sacred law, just as well as
if a host had robbed his guest. Dante has four forms of treachery
punished in the ninth and lowest circle of Hell: treachery against kin,
against nation or party, against host or guest, and against master or
benefactor. That’s in order of gravity, as he saw it. To betray a guest
or a host is so wicked, Dante imagines that the soul of the traitor is
sent immediately to that continent of ice below, while the body,
animated by a demon, still seems alive above.
And what do you know, but the words guest and host are cousins! So is
the word hostile — and host as in army. The sense is that somebody you
don’t know who suddenly shows up on your frontier may be there as an
enemy. In one branch of our Indo-European family, the prehistoric
consonant gh- became g; in another, it became h (see Latin hortis, but
German Garten; see Latin haedus, but English goat). So our word host
comes to us through French and the Latin side; but guest comes from
Anglo-Saxon and the Germanic side. It’s good, isn’t it, that the words
are cousins? So should the persons they name also be, in spirit. I’m
guessing that the old Mom-and-Pop Fogelsanger’s Hotel was in that way
more of a hotel than the big impersonal hotels are now.

Share Word & Song by Anthony Esolen

Word & Song by Anthony Esolen is an online magazine devoted to
reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true. We publish essays
each week, on words, classic hymns, poems, films, and popular songs, as
well weekly podcasts on a wide variety of topics. Paid subscribers
receive audio-enhanced posts, on-demand access to our full archive, and
may share comments.

Browse Our Archive

Note: Our full archive of over 1,000 posts, videos, audios is available
on demand to paid subscribers only. We know that not everyone has time
every day for a read and a listen. So we have built the archive with
you all in mind. Please do browse, and please do share posts that you
like with others.
We enjoy reading your comments, and we encourage you to read (and reply
to) the comments which other members share on our posts. We’ve got a
great group of folks joining us in this journey of reclamation!

Thank you, as always, for supporting our effort to restore every day a
little bit of the good, the beautiful, and the true.

Discussion about this episode
