**Word & Song by Anthony Esolen: Blessed Assurance**

Fanny Crosby, 1873

Anthony Esolen Oct 28, 2025

Fanny Crosby, the author of today’s Hymn of the Week was a
remarkable woman. Mistreatment of a disease when she was a little baby
left her blind for life, but she never grumbled about it, nor did she
envy those who could see. It was the reverse. She said that had it not
been for her blindness, she would never have gotten the excellent
education she received — at the New York Institution for the Blind,
where she also was a teacher herself for eleven years. Her blindness,
she said, also sharpened her memory. Here I am, patting myself on the
back for memorizing, so far, about 85% of Milton’s Paradise Lost — the
work of a blind man; and I have the book beside me to look at when I
stumble. But Fanny Crosby, when she was only ten years old, had
committed to memory the first four books of the Old Testament and the
four Gospels. She also played the piano and the guitar, and composed
her own music and poetry. One of her poems she recited in the Senate
chambers in Washington, and that was the first time a woman had spoken
there in any official capacity. She was there to advocate for the
education of the blind.
She had a tender heart, as you can tell from this lovely incident. When
she was at the Institute for the Blind, quite a few important men would
come to visit, including a couple of Presidents, and Senator Henry
Clay, “the Great Pacificator.” The last time he visited was in 1847,
and he had recently lost his son, Henry Clay, Jr., in the Mexican War,
at the battle of Buena Vista. Fanny had sent a poem she wrote for him,
to console him. At his visit, she was chosen to read a poem in his
honor, which she did, avoiding any mention of his son, so as not to
pain him. But, says Fanny, “When I had finished he drew my arm in his,
and, addressing the audience, said through his tears: ‘This is not the
first poem for which I am indebted to this lady. Six months ago she
sent me some lines on the death of my dear son.’ Both of us were
overcome for a few moments. Soon, by a splendid effort, Mr. Clay
recovered himself, but I could not control my tears.”

She was humble, too. Besides her own name, she used 46 pseudonyms (7 of
them male), so that it wouldn’t appear that she was overwhelming the
hymnals that published her work, and so that she wouldn’t be attracting
so much attention to herself. Call it a matter of her left hand not
knowing what her right hand was doing — or her other right hand, or her
still other right hand, and so on.

The watchwords in Fanny Crosby’s hymns are gratitude and assurance. And
don’t they go together? Let’s think about this. Ungrateful people cast
others in their own shadowy and uncertain light. They suspect that
every gift has a hook in it, a catch. Or they do not acknowledge the
gift at all. They themselves are stingy, wary. They rely on no one, and
no one can rely on them. We may think of the Israelites on their
sojourn from Egypt, ready to return to slavery just so they can fill
their bellies, and complaining about Moses. When Milton’s Raphael first
warns Adam against swerving into sin, Adam replies with complete
gratitude and assurance:

But that we never shall forget to love
Our Maker, and obey Him whose command,
Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assure me and still assure.

Alas, it will not always be that way.
Fanny Crosby lived, we might say, on her inheritance from Jesus. She
didn’t live as a rich woman. She and her husband, Alexander Van
Alstyne, also blind, gave music lessons, and he was a paid organist at
a couple of the big churches in New York City, so they could have lived
comfortably, but Fanny would always give away everything they had that
went beyond what was strictly necessary. They had a child, but she died
in infancy. We don’t know much about their private life. About Mrs. Van
Alstyne’s public life, we know a great deal, because she was always on
the go — an abolitionist, a promoter of missions to the poor, and a
great supporter of the Grand Army of the Republic, the veterans’ group
that ministered to the families of soldiers who fought on the Union
side. But I like to think of her rather as the young lady who
befriended a teenage boy in New York. He would visit her for a couple
of hours at the end of the working day, transcribing her poems for her,
because Fanny’s handwriting was illegible. The boy’s name was Grover
Cleveland.

Give the Gift of Word & Song

As I said in my discussion of our Word of the Week, heir, the slave
obeys his master out of fear. But Christ has made us sons and
daughters, so, as Saint Paul says, we can cry out, “Abba, Father!” And
if we are children, we are heirs. We have left the economy of payment
for services rendered, to enter the economy of the gift. That’s where
life really flourishes. We aren’t units of production. We are persons —
and each person is of inestimable worth. Had there been only a single
sinner in all the world, Jesus would have died for his sake. That’s the
purchase he made, by giving his blood.

Word & Song by Anthony Esolen is an online magazine devoted to
reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true. We publish six essays
each week, on words, classic hymn, poems, films, and popular songs, as
well a weekly podcast, alternately Poetry Aloud or Anthony
Esolen Speaks. To support this project, please join us as a free or
paid subscriber.
