**Food, Glorious Food!**

*From the musical, "Oliver!"*

*Debra Esolen Oct 18, 2025*

In our week devoted to feasts at Word & Song, what better song
can I choose than “Food, Glorious Food” from the musical “Oliver?” Our
long-time subscribers may recall that I’ve discussed this musical
before, a couple of years back. I mentioned then that in his teens, my
father worked at a local movie theater, and because of that job, got to
see all of the wonderful films from the war years and through the
1940’s. From then on, except for his Navy years, my father saw every
new film release. And from the time I was a small child he began taking
me to see the movies with him, if they were suitable for children (most
were!). I saw “Oliver” in 1968 with Dad in Montclair, NJ, the nearest
theater to us which showed Cinerama or other wide-screen movies. That’s
where he had taken me to see “Mary Poppins,” “The Wonderful Tales of
the Brothers Grimm,” “The Sound of Music,” and “The Greatest Story Ever
Told,” among others.

I had no idea then what went into creating such a massive production as
this one was. I didn’t know that Lionel Bart, who wrote “the book” —
that is, the libretto for the stage play, not the Dickens novel! — had
devoted so much of his life and talents to bringing his musical vision
to the the stage and then to the big screen; or that in securing the
production of the story that made up the bulk of his life’s work, Bart
— broke and out of desperation for funds — sold the rights to “Oliver”
to a “friend,” well-known entertainer Max Bygraves, for £350! And thus
Bart sold away his rights to all royalties for the show before it even
hit the theaters. I didn’t know (nor would I have cared, though it is
notable indeed) that Lionel Bart could not read music and that — unlike
some of our favorite early-to-mid century American songwriters who
didn’t read music — he neither played an instrument nor was a singer
himself.

It seems Bart’s parents dropped the ball when, at age six, his teacher
told them that their son was “a musical genius.” They found him an old
violin, and thus ended his “formal” music training. But the teacher was
right. Lionel Bart had a native talent for song. Somehow he found his
way to the popular music scene in London, composing songs and lyrics
for the likes of Tommy Steele (whom he discovered and who came to be
considered England’s first rock and roll star).

What else didn’t I know about Lionel Bart’s work back then? That as a
songwriter and librettist he played a big part in a renaissance in
London’s West End theater district of British (rather than American)
musicals? That his stage production of “Oliver!” (1960) in London was a
record-breaker for its day, with a run of over seven years in the UK,
before it crossed the pond to take Broadway by storm in 1963? None of
this. All I knew was that I was seeing a tremendous and unforgettable
performance on a screen that was bigger than life. I went home from the
movie that day singing songs which have stayed with me for a lifetime.

No one who has seen the film (or who is so fortunate as to have seen
the play in person in the 1960’s) can forget the magnificent
performance put in by Ron Moody, as Fagan, and by the casts in either
London or New York. Moody played the role in the West End, on Broadway,
and again in the 1968 film, which won six Academy Awards that year: for
Best Picture, Best Director (Carol Reed), Best Score of a Musical, a
Golden Globe Best Actor for Moody, and a host of other awards. Andrew
Lloyd Webber, commenting on the success and importance of the original
stage performance of “Oliver!, dubbed Lionel Bart “the father of
British musical theater,” and there’s a case to be made for that
assessment.

I wish I could say that I’d read Oliver Twist before I saw this film,
but I had not. However, what I had read by then (I was a precocious
reader) was David Copperfield, still my favorite Dickens novel. I knew
about workhouses from that story, and I knew about poverty from stories
my parents told me from their childhood during the Great Depression. In
the case of my mother’s family, the poverty was grinding, and food,
clothing, and housing were difficult for her parents to provide. “Food,
Glorious Food?” My parents were “willing to try it” as children, when
the opportunity arose. And I’d venture to say that Lionel Bart —
youngest child of pogrom survivors who had fled to England and were
barely able to scrape together a living for their family — knew what it
was to long for food. No wonder the story of Oliver Twist made such an
impression on him.

So here it is, our Sometimes a Song, one that I can still sing from
memory all these years later! I hope you will enjoy this musical
feast today.
