Word & Song by Anthony Esolen

"YESTERDAY"

Sometimes a Song

Debra Esolen
Oct 04, 2025

I’ve written about a great number of wistful songs on these pages, and
I did consider revisiting one of those songs for this week. One wistful
song, “The Shadow of Your Smile,” became a hit for Tony Bennett in
1965, the same year when today’s song was first released as a single
by a chart-topping band called— The Beatles. At the Grammy Awards for
year, both songs were nominated for Best Song, and not surprisingly
since it had already won an Oscar as the theme from “The Sandpipers”,
“[9]The Shadow of your Smile” won the Grammy for Song of the Year,
as well. Thirty one years later, in 1997, Paul McCartney’s “Yesterday”
finally did earn a Grammy, when it was inducted into the Grammy Hall of
Fame. It has since been recognized as the most-performed song of the
20th century and as one of the most-covered songs of the century, with
well over 2,200 recordings by every imaginable singer and band across
the genres for the 60 years since its release. And the song is among
the very highest money-making songs of the 20th century, as well.

I’ve always thought of “Yesterday” as a Beatles song, but that’s not
exactly right. Oddly, the song was first recorded by and became hit
single for British singer, Matt Munro, whose version soared to the top
10 in the UK charts before the song was even released by The Beatles at
all. How Munro came to use the song, I haven’t been able to discover.
It seems that Paul McCartney had composed the tune at least a year or
more earlier, and had been fiddling with it for a long time before he
was satisfied with it. When he thought that the tune was done, he
suddenly became nervous for fear that he might have unconsciously
plagiarized parts of it from some standard he’d heard somewhere. Yet no
one he sang it to recognized it. (This is perhaps what happens when you
grow up listening to standards, but primarily write rock n’ roll.) A
standard it was, indeed, but his own. And that was part of the problem.

“Yesterday” was a great song, but not right as a Beatles song, at least
not when the band were establishing their style and reputation. Paul
ran the tune by each of the other Beatles separately for ideas about
how the band might use it. Ringo listened, and said that he didn’t
think drums would fit the song. Both John Lennon and George Harrison
liked the song but neither thought he could improve upon it. Ultimately
the band’s producer George Martin suggested adding strings to the
recording which Paul had recently made with just his acoustic guitar
and his voice. “You mean, release it as a solo"? Paul asked, astounded.
What to do?

The song seemed an outlier at the time, not in synch with the band’s
image and unsuitable for a release under their joint name. So why
didn’t Paul McCartney release the song on his own? Recall that this was
the mid-1960’s, and The Beatles were still a new sensation, just having
“made it” and still writing and recording and releasing their early
work. Right then, no one involved in promoting the band, including The
Beatles themselves, wanted even to hint at a break-up. What they should
do with the Paul’s song, “Yesterday,” was not clear. I am sure that
after Munro had made a hit of the song in England, The Beatles would
have wanted to release their version in the US as soon as possible. So
in it went, as second-to-last song on “Help!” in August of 1965, with a
separate release of the song as a single about a month later. And what
was on the flip side of Paul’s standard? Why, Ringo Starr’s version of
a C&W song, “Act Naturally,” which he sang in the film and which was
also included on the album. It seems that The Beatles didn’t restrict
their musical tastes to Rock alone. And that made their music all the
better.

George Harrison observed that most people had no idea what a simple and
exceedingly low-tech recording system they had used to produce
“Yesterday” First, the song was written entirely by Paul McCartney and
recorded by him alone, singing and playing acoustic guitar. The string
quartet was added with a recording of Paul’s voice broadcasted from one
side of the studio and one of his guitar from the opposite side, with
the quartet playing in the middle. There was a degree of “leakage” in
the original track, because the guitar mic picked up some of the vocal
and the vocal mic picked up some of the guitar. But somehow with the
strings added the “leakage” was toned down, and the song seemed, to
everyone’s ears, perfect. And the simplicity of the recording from
those long-ago years only adds to the wistfulness of “Yesterday.”

Just one more thing: For contractual reasons, the Beatles could not
release Paul’s version of “Yesterday” as a single in the UK until 1976,
but when they did, the decade-old recording bounded right back to the
top of the charts — even after The Beatles themselves had disbanded.

