Word & Song by Anthony Esolen
Anthony Esolen Speaks
On Hospitality

by Anthony Esolen

On Hospitality

And the goodness of boundaries

Anthony Esolen
Oct 10, 2025
- Paid

On hospitality, we can learn a lot from Robert Frost.
“Good fences make good neighbors,” says the gruff fellow in Frost’s
poem “Mending Wall,” as he and the speaker engage in what seems like
a pointless ritual every year after the spring thaw. They walk along
the wall between their properties, and replace the stones that have
fallen, some by the boisterousness of hunters, but most by the
mysterious working of nature. For, the speaker says, “Something there
is that does not love a wall, / That wants it down.” And why should he
and the neighbor have any wall? “There where it is we do not need the
wall,” says the speaker, as “He is all pine and I am apple orchard.”
But in fact, it is not good for apple trees to have pine trees too
nearby; the pine needles can make the soil too acidic, and pines are
great users of water. I am not sure whether the apples tend to work any
harm on the pines. In any case, the speaker looks down on his neighbor
a bit, saying, as the man carries a large hunk of rock, that he appears
like “an old stone savage, armed.” But the neighbor repeats the saying
that his father used to say, and they are the last words in the poem,
“Good fences make good neighbors.” Frost thus leaves the two attitudes
in tension.
The wall-building need not be taken as an act of restrained hostility.
It may be taken as an act of honoring boundaries, and in that sense it
is a form of deference to your neighbor. The old Romans, in their early
days as an agrarian people, as they had a god for everything
traditional, had also a god for boundary stones: Terminus. It is not
hard to see why farmers need boundary stones. Unscrupulous neighbors
might otherwise encroach on their land, perhaps to divert or dam an
important stream, and all at once real hostility will erupt. I have
been told that one of the things that puts a spoke in the wheels of
economic prosperity in some nations is uncertainty regarding ownership
of land. Such uncertainty leaves people wary and unlikely to make
improvements on land that might not be their own after all, or that
might be taken from them even if it is their own. But beyond the matter
of real estate, boundaries – walls – are indispensable for art, for
science, for healthy social interchange, and for the moral and
religious life itself. They are in fact constitutive of creation.

“Here shall your proud waves be stayed,” says God to the surging of the
sea; “thus far shall you go, and no farther” (Job 38:11). God creates
not by confusing but by distinguishing: “God separated the light from
the darkness” (Gen. 1:4); he separated the waters above the firmament
from the waters below (1:7); he separated the sea from the dry land
(1:9); he “made the beasts of the field according to their kinds”
(1:25), and all the birds and fish and other animals also; and within
the human race itself, the sacred author marks the blessed division:
“Male and female he created them” (1:27). For “God is not the author of
confusion” (1 Cor. 14:33). Indeed, if confusion is your aim, you create
nothing; you miscreate or uncreate.
For the moral law is not distinguishable from being. To all that God
makes in the beginning, he gives the judgment that it is good: and we
mistake badly if we consider the goodness as merely instrumental toward
some purpose, or if we attribute the judgment as describing only God’s
pleasure. The Hebrew words we translate as “that it was good,” ki tov,
are precisely the same as are uttered in several of the most glorious
psalms of praise, but there they are spoken of God himself: “Give
thanks to the Lord, for he is good” (Ps. 116:1; Hebrew ki tov). It is
good that birds are birds and not fish; it is good that sheep are sheep
and not lions; and, within the human race, it is good that man is man
and not woman, and that woman is woman and not man, so that we can
perceive that they are made mutually for one another, essentially, and
not by circumstance, and certainly not by feelings that can flare and
fade in the wind, or by social customs that may be good or evil.
All moral laws, not only those that regard sex, are walls, not just to
include some actions and exclude others. They constitute the social
body: they clothe it in flesh. It does not take much imagination to see
what happens when, in principle, the laws are denied. It is like sawing
through the supporting beams of a house, which then groans in the wind
and begins to lean. In the end you have no house at all, only a heap of
wooden and stone oddments that used to be a house, a place not fit for
human habitations, though the rats may like it well enough. Suppose
your banker may take your money to Las Vegas to place it – for his
benefit and yours, if he wins – in jeopardy. Of course, his bank must
fail, but the effect is far worse. If banks may do such things, there
will be no banks, because no one will trust them. If people may come
into your store and pinch your goods with impunity, it is not just that
your store will go under. Nobody will put a store there to begin with.
Even hospitality depends on the distinction between what belongs to
someone and what does not; and the virtue of hospitality is mutual,
between the host and the guest. A man who never invites anyone into his
house is not hospitable, but he does less harm to the virtue than does
the squatter, who is in open defiance; his example makes a travesty of
it. When I was a boy, we were given to know whose yards it was
permitted for us to play in, and we observed the unwritten rules. One
old man did not mind if we used the back of his property for baseball,
so long as we did not climb up on his shed or hang around near his
house. That was to be hospitable both ways.

When I was a paperboy, I knew I could cut several hundred yards off my
route by taking a narrow passage between two houses, crossing a
footbridge over a creek, and cutting through the backyard of one of the
houses to which I delivered a paper. The owner permitted it. But I did
not linger there, and I did not use the path unless I was on my route.
That too was to be hospitable both ways.

Word & Song by Anthony Esolen is a reader-supported magazine
devoted to reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true. To receive
new posts and support this project, join us as a free or paid subscriber.
