Apostolic Exhortation Dilexi Te of the Holy Father Leo XIV to All Christians on Love for the Poor
=================================================================================================

**by Pope Leo XIV**

Descriptive Title

Delexi Te

Description

Pope Leo XIV's first teaching document, an apostolic exhortation on
care for the poor, was drafted by starting with the planned text by
Pope Francis but revising it substantially to reflect Pope Leo’s own
approach to the issue. The completed text was signed and dated on
October 4, 2025, and released publicly a few days later.

Publisher & Date

Vatican Press, Vatican City, 2025

1. “I HAVE LOVED YOU” (Rev 3:9). The Lord speaks these words to a
Christian community that, unlike some others, had no influence or
resources, and was treated instead with violence and contempt: “You
have but little power… I will make them come and bow down before your
feet” (Rev 3:8-9). This text reminds us of the words of the canticle of
Mary: “He has cast down the mighty from their thrones, and lifted up
the lowly; he has filled the hungry with good things, and sent the rich
away empty” (Lk 1:52-53).

2. This declaration of love, taken from the Book of Revelation,
reflects the inexhaustible mystery that Pope Francis reflected upon
in the Encyclical Dilexit Nos on the human and divine love of the
heart of Jesus Christ. There we saw how Jesus identified himself “with
the lowest ranks of society” and how, with his love poured out to the
end, he confirms the dignity of every human being, especially when
“they are weak, scorned, or suffering.” As we contemplate
Christ’s love, “we too are inspired to be more attentive to the
sufferings and needs of others, and confirmed in our efforts to share
in his work of liberation as instruments for the spread of his love.”

3. For this reason, in continuity with the Encyclical Dilexit Nos,
Pope Francis was preparing in the last months of his life an
Apostolic Exhortation on the Church’s care for the poor, to which he
gave the title Dilexi Te, as if Christ speaks those words to each of
them, saying: “You have but little power,” yet “I have loved you” ( Rev
3:9). I am happy to make this document my own — adding some reflections
— and to issue it at the beginning of my own pontificate, since I share
the desire of my beloved predecessor that all Christians come to
appreciate the close connection between Christ’s love and his summons
to care for the poor. I too consider it essential to insist on this
path to holiness, for “in this call to recognize him in the poor and
the suffering, we see revealed the very heart of Christ, his deepest
feelings and choices, which every saint seeks to imitate.” 

CHAPTER ONE
A FEW ESSENTIAL WORDS

4. Jesus’ disciples criticized the woman who poured costly perfumed oil
on his head. They said: “Why this waste? For this ointment could have
been sold for a large sum, and the money given to the poor.” However,
the Lord said to them in response: “You always have the poor with you,
but you will not always have me” (Mt 26:8-9,11). That woman saw in
Jesus the lowly and suffering Messiah on whom she could pour out all
her love. What comfort that anointing must have brought to the very
head that within a few days would be pierced by thorns! It was a small
gesture, of course, but those who suffer know how great even a small
gesture of affection can be, and how much relief it can bring. Jesus
understood this and told the disciples that the memory of her gesture
would endure: “Wherever this good news is proclaimed in the whole
world, what she has done will be told in remembrance of her” (Mt
26:13). The simplicity of that woman’s gesture speaks volumes. No sign
of affection, even the smallest, will ever be forgotten, especially if
it is shown to those who are suffering, lonely or in need, as was the
Lord at that time.

5. Love for the Lord, then, is one with love for the poor. The same
Jesus who tells us, “The poor you will always have with you” (Mt
26:11), also promises the disciples: “I am with you always” (Mt 28:20).
We likewise think of his saying: “Just as you did it to one of the
least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did it to me” (Mt
25:40). This is not a matter of mere human kindness but a revelation:
contact with those who are lowly and powerless is a fundamental way of
encountering the Lord of history. In the poor, he continues to speak to
us.

Saint Francis

6. Pope Francis, explaining his choice of that name, related how,
after his election, a Cardinal friend of his embraced him, kissed him
and told him: “Do not forget the poor!” It is the same appeal
that the leaders of the Church made to Saint Paul when he went up
to Jerusalem to confirm his mission (cf. Gal 2:1-10). Years later, the
Apostle could still reaffirm that this was “actually what I was eager
to do” ( Gal 2:10). Care for the poor was also a great concern of
Saint Francis of Assisi: in the person of a leper, Christ himself
embraced Francis and changed his life. Even today, Saint Francis,
as the Poor Man of Assisi, continues to inspire us by his outstanding
example.

7. Eight centuries ago, Saint Francis prompted an evangelical
renewal in the Christians and society of his time. Wealthy and
self-confident, the young Francis was taken aback and converted by his
direct contact with the poor and outcast of society. The story of his
life continues to appeal to the minds and hearts of believers, and many
non-believers as well. It “changed history.” A further step on
the same path was taken by the Second Vatican Council, as Saint
Paul VI pointed out when he said that “the ancient parable of the
Samaritan served as the model for the Council’s spirituality.” 
I am convinced that the preferential choice for the poor is a source
of extraordinary renewal both for the Church and for society, if we can
only set ourselves free of our self-centeredness and open our ears to
their cry.

The cry of the poor

8. The passage of Sacred Scripture in which God reveals himself to
Moses in the burning bush can serve as a constant starting-point for
this effort. There he says: “I have observed the misery of my people
who are in Egypt; I have heard their cry on account of their
taskmasters. Indeed, I know their sufferings, and I have come down to
deliver them... So come, I will send you” ( Ex 3:7-8,10). God
thus shows his concern for the needs of the poor: “When the Israelites
cried out to the Lord, he raised up for them a deliverer” ( Judg 3:15).
In hearing the cry of the poor, we are asked to enter into the heart of
God, who is always concerned for the needs of his children, especially
those in greatest need. If we remain unresponsive to that cry, the poor
might well cry out to the Lord against us, and we would incur guilt
(cf. Deut 15:9) and turn away from the very heart of God.

9. The condition of the poor is a cry that, throughout human history,
constantly challenges our lives, societies, political and economic
systems, and, not least, the Church. On the wounded faces of the poor,
we see the suffering of the innocent and, therefore, the suffering of
Christ himself. At the same time, we should perhaps speak more
correctly of the many faces of the poor and of poverty, since it is a
multifaceted phenomenon. In fact, there are many forms of poverty: the
poverty of those who lack material means of subsistence, the poverty of
those who are socially marginalized and lack the means to give voice to
their dignity and abilities, moral and spiritual poverty, cultural
poverty, the poverty of those who find themselves in a condition of
personal or social weakness or fragility, the poverty of those who have
no rights, no space, no freedom.

10. In this sense, it can be said that the commitment to the poor and
to removing the social and structural causes of poverty has gained
importance in recent decades, but it remains insufficient. This is also
the case because our societies often favor criteria for orienting life
and politics that are marked by numerous inequalities. As a result, the
old forms of poverty that we have become aware of and are trying to
combat are being joined by new ones, sometimes more subtle and
dangerous. From this point of view, it is to be welcomed that the
United Nations has made the eradication of poverty one of its
Millennium Goals.

11. A concrete commitment to the poor must also be accompanied by a
change in mentality that can have an impact at the cultural level. In
fact, the illusion of happiness derived from a comfortable life pushes
many people towards a vision of life centered on the accumulation of
wealth and social success at all costs, even at the expense of others
and by taking advantage of unjust social ideals and political-economic
systems that favor the strongest. Thus, in a world where the poor are
increasingly numerous, we paradoxically see the growth of a wealthy
elite, living in a bubble of comfort and luxury, almost in another
world compared to ordinary people. This means that a culture still
persists — sometimes well disguised — that discards others without even
realizing it and tolerates with indifference that millions of people
die of hunger or survive in conditions unfit for human beings. A few
years ago, the photo of a lifeless child lying on a Mediterranean beach
caused an uproar; unfortunately, apart from some momentary outcry,
similar events are becoming increasingly irrelevant and seen as
marginal news items.

12. We must not let our guard down when it comes to poverty. We should
be particularly concerned about the serious conditions in which many
people find themselves due to lack of food and water. In wealthy
countries too, the growing numbers of the poor are equally a source of
concern. In Europe, more and more families find themselves unable to
make it to the end of the month. In general, we are witnessing an
increase in different kinds of poverty, which is no longer a single,
uniform reality but now involves multiple forms of economic and social
impoverishment, reflecting the spread of inequality even in largely
affluent contexts. Let us not forget that “doubly poor are those women
who endure situations of exclusion, mistreatment and violence, since
they are frequently less able to defend their rights. Even so, we
constantly witness among them impressive examples of daily heroism in
defending and protecting their vulnerable families.” While
significant changes are under way in some countries, “the organization
of societies worldwide is still far from reflecting clearly that women
possess the same dignity and identical rights as men. We say one thing
with our words, but our decisions and reality tell another story,”
especially if we consider the numbers of women who are in fact
destitute.

Ideological prejudices

13. Looking beyond the data — which is sometimes “interpreted” to
convince us that the situation of the poor is not so serious — the
overall reality is quite evident: “Some economic rules have proved
effective for growth, but not for integral human development. Wealth
has increased, but together with inequality, with the result that ‘new
forms of poverty are emerging.’ The claim that the modern world has
reduced poverty is made by measuring poverty with criteria from the
past that do not correspond to present-day realities. In other times,
for example, lack of access to electric energy was not considered a
sign of poverty, nor was it a source of hardship. Poverty must always
be understood and gauged in the context of the actual opportunities
available in each concrete historical period.” Looking beyond
specific situations and contexts, however, a 1984 document of the
European Community declared that “‘the poor’ shall be taken to mean
persons, families and groups of persons whose resources (material,
cultural and social) are so limited as to exclude them from the minimum
acceptable way of life in the Member States in which they live.”
Yet if we acknowledge that all human beings have the same
dignity, independent of their place of birth, the immense differences
existing between countries and regions must not be ignored.

14. The poor are not there by chance or by blind and cruel fate. Nor,
for most of them, is poverty a choice. Yet, there are those who still
presume to make this claim, thus revealing their own blindness and
cruelty. Of course, among the poor there are also those who do not want
to work, perhaps because their ancestors, who worked all their lives,
died poor. However, there are so many others — men and women — who
nonetheless work from dawn to dusk, perhaps collecting scraps or the
like, even though they know that their hard work will only help them to
scrape by, but never really improve their lives. Nor can it be said
that most of the poor are such because they do not “deserve” otherwise,
as maintained by that specious view of meritocracy that sees only the
successful as “deserving.”

15. Christians too, on a number of occasions, have succumbed to
attitudes shaped by secular ideologies or political and economic
approaches that lead to gross generalizations and mistaken conclusions.
The fact that some dismiss or ridicule charitable works, as if they
were an obsession on the part of a few and not the burning heart of the
Church’s mission, convinces me of the need to go back and re-read the
Gospel, lest we risk replacing it with the wisdom of this world. The
poor cannot be neglected if we are to remain within the great current
of the Church’s life that has its source in the Gospel and bears fruit
in every time and place.

CHAPTER TWO
GOD CHOOSES THE POOR

The choice of the poor

16. God is merciful love, and his plan of love, which unfolds and is
fulfilled in history, is above all his descent and coming among us to
free us from slavery, fear, sin and the power of death. Addressing
their human condition with a merciful gaze and a heart full of love, he
turned to his creatures and thus took care of their poverty. Precisely
in order to share the limitations and fragility of our human nature, he
himself became poor and was born in the flesh like us. We came to know
him in the smallness of a child laid in a manger and in the extreme
humiliation of the cross, where he shared our radical poverty, which is
death. It is easy to understand, then, why we can also speak
theologically of a preferential option on the part of God for the poor,
an expression that arose in the context of the Latin American continent
and in particular in the Puebla Assembly, but which has been well
integrated into subsequent teachings of the Church. This
“preference” never indicates exclusivity or discrimination towards
other groups, which would be impossible for God. It is meant to
emphasize God’s actions, which are moved by compassion toward the
poverty and weakness of all humanity. Wanting to inaugurate a kingdom
of justice, fraternity and solidarity, God has a special place in his
heart for those who are discriminated against and oppressed, and he
asks us, his Church, to make a decisive and radical choice in favor of
the weakest.

17. It is in this perspective that we can understand the numerous pages
of the Old Testament in which God is presented as the friend and
liberator of the poor, the one who hears the cry of the poor and
intervenes to free them (cf. Ps 34:7). God, the refuge of the poor,
denounces through the prophets — we recall in particular Amos and
Isaiah — the injustices committed against the weakest, and exhorts
Israel to renew its worship from within, because one cannot pray and
offer sacrifice while oppressing the weakest and poorest. From the
beginning of Scripture, God’s love is vividly demonstrated by his
protection of the weak and the poor, to the extent that he can be said
to have a particular fondness for them. “God’s heart has a special
place for the poor... The entire history of our redemption is marked by
the presence of the poor.” 

Jesus, the poor Messiah

18. The Old Testament history of God’s preferential love for the poor
and his readiness to hear their cry — to which I have briefly alluded —
comes to fulfillment in Jesus of Nazareth. By his Incarnation,
he “emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human
likeness” ( Phil 2:7), and in that form he brought us salvation. His
was a radical poverty, grounded in his mission to reveal fully God’s
love for us (cf. Jn 1:18; 1 Jn 4:9). As Saint Paul puts it in his
customarily brief but striking manner: “You know well the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, so that by his poverty you might become rich” ( 2 Cor
8:9).

19. The Gospel shows us that poverty marked every aspect of Jesus’
life. From the moment he entered the world, Jesus knew the bitter
experience of rejection. The Evangelist Luke tells how Joseph and Mary,
who was about to give birth, arrived in Bethlehem, and then adds,
poignantly, that “there was no place for them in the inn” (Lk 2:7).
Jesus was born in humble surroundings and laid in a manger; then, to
save him from being killed, they fled to Egypt (cf. Mt 2:13-15). At the
dawn of his public ministry, after announcing in the synagogue of
Nazareth that the year of grace which would bring joy to the poor was
fulfilled in him, he was driven out of town (cf. Lk 4:14-30). He died
as an outcast, led out of Jerusalem to be crucified (cf. Mk 15:22).
Indeed, that is how Jesus’ poverty is best described: he experienced
the same exclusion that is the lot of the poor, the outcast of society.
Jesus is a manifestation of this privilegium pauperum. He presented
himself to the world not only as a poor Messiah, but also as the
Messiah of and for the poor.

20. There are some clues about Jesus’ social status. First of all, he
worked as a craftsman or carpenter, téktōn (cf. Mk 6:3). These were
people who earned their living by manual labor. Not owning land, they
were considered inferior to farmers. When the baby Jesus was presented
in the Temple by Joseph and Mary, his parents offered a pair of
turtledoves or pigeons (cf. Lk 2:22-24), which according to the
prescriptions of the Book of Leviticus (cf. 12:8) was the offering of
the poor. A fairly significant episode in the Gospel tells us how
Jesus, together with his disciples, gathered heads of grain to eat as
they passed through the fields (cf. Mk 2:23-28). Only the poor were
allowed to do this gleaning in the fields. Moreover, Jesus says of
himself: “Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the
Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head” (Mt 8:20; Lk 9:58). He is, in
fact, an itinerant teacher, whose poverty and precariousness are signs
of his bond with the Father. They are also conditions for those who
wish to follow him on the path of discipleship. In this way, the
renunciation of goods, riches and worldly securities becomes a visible
sign of entrusting oneself to God and his providence.

21. At the beginning of his public ministry, Jesus appeared in the
synagogue of Nazareth reading the scroll of the prophet Isaiah and
applying the prophet’s words to himself: “The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because he has anointed me to bring good news to the poor” (Lk
4:18; cf. Is 61:1). He thus reveals himself as the One who, in the here
and now of history, comes to bring about God’s loving closeness, which
is above all a work of liberation for those who are prisoners of evil,
and for the weak and the poor. The signs that accompany Jesus’
preaching are manifestations of the love and compassion with which God
looks upon the sick, the poor and sinners who, because of their
condition, were marginalized by society and even people of faith. He
opens the eyes of the blind, heals lepers, raises the dead and
proclaims the good news to the poor: God is near, God loves you (cf. Lk
7:22). This explains why he proclaims: “Blessed are you poor, for yours
is the kingdom of God” (Lk 6:20). God shows a preference for the poor:
the Lord’s words of hope and liberation are addressed first of all to
them. Therefore, even in their poverty or weakness, no one should feel
abandoned. And the Church, if she wants to be Christ’s Church, must be
a Church of the Beatitudes, one that makes room for the little ones and
walks poor with the poor, a place where the poor have a privileged
place (cf. Jas 2:2-4).

22. In that time, the needy and the sick, lacking the necessities of
life, frequently found themselves forced to beg. They thus bore the
added burden of social shame, due to the belief that sickness and
poverty were somehow linked to personal sin. Jesus firmly countered
this mentality by insisting that God “makes his sun rise on the evil
and on the good, and sends rain on the righteous and on the
unrighteous” (Mt 5:45). Indeed, he completely overturned that notion,
as we see from the ending of the parable of the rich man and Lazarus:
“Child, remember that during your lifetime you received your good
things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he is comforted
here, and you are in agony” (Lk 16:25).

23. It becomes clear, then, that “our faith in Christ, who became poor,
and was always close to the poor and the outcast, is the basis of our
concern for the integral development of society’s most neglected
members.” I often wonder, even though the teaching of Sacred
Scripture is so clear about the poor, why many people continue to think
that they can safely disregard the poor. For the moment, though, let us
pursue our reflection on what the Scriptures have to tell us about our
relationship with the poor and their essential place in the people of
God.

Mercy towards the poor in the Bible

24. The Apostle John writes: “Those who do not love a brother or sister
whom they have seen, cannot love God whom they have not seen” (1 Jn
4:20). Similarly, in his reply to the scribe’s question, Jesus quotes
the two ancient commandments: “You shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might” (Deut
6:5), and “You shall love your neighbor as yourself” (Lev 19:18),
uniting them in a single commandment. The Evangelist Mark reports
Jesus’ response in these terms: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel: the
Lord our God, the Lord is one; you shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and
with all your strength.’ The second is this, ‘You shall love your
neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than
these” (12:29-31).

25. The passage from the Book of Leviticus teaches love for one’s
neighbor, while other texts call for respect — if not also love — even
for one’s enemy: “When you come upon your enemy’s ox or donkey going
astray, you shall bring it back. When you see the donkey of one who
hates you lying under its burden and you would hold back from setting
it free, you must help to set it free” (Ex 23:4-5). Here the intrinsic
value of respect for others is expressly stated: anyone in need, even
an enemy, always deserves our assistance.

26. Jesus’ teaching on the primacy of love for God is clearly
complemented by his insistence that one cannot love God without
extending one’s love to the poor. Love for our neighbor is tangible
proof of the authenticity of our love for God, as the Apostle John
attests: “No one has ever seen God; if we love one another, God lives
in us, and his love is perfected in us… God is love, and those who
abide in love abide in God, and God abides in them” (1 Jn 4:12,16). The
two loves are distinct yet inseparable. Even in cases where there is no
explicit reference to God, the Lord himself teaches that every act of
love for one’s neighbor is in some way a reflection of divine charity:
“Truly I tell you, just as you did it to one of the least of these my
brethren, you did it to me” (Mt 25:40).

27. For this reason, works of mercy are recommended as a sign of the
authenticity of worship, which, while giving praise to God, has the
task of opening us to the transformation that the Spirit can bring
about in us, so that we may all become an image of Christ and his mercy
towards the weakest. In this sense, our relationship with the Lord,
expressed in worship, also aims to free us from the risk of living our
relationships according to a logic of calculation and self-interest. We
are instead open to the gratuitousness that surrounds those who love
one another and, therefore, share everything in common. In this regard,
Jesus advises: “When you give a dinner or a banquet, do not invite your
friends or your brothers or your relatives or rich neighbors, lest they
also invite you in return, and you be repaid. But when you give a
feast, invite the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and you will
be blessed, because they cannot repay you” (Lk 14:12-14).

28. The Lord’s appeal to show mercy to the poor culminates in the great
parable of the last judgment (cf. Mt 25:31-46), which can serve as a
vivid illustration of the Beatitude of the merciful. In that parable,
the Lord offers us the key to our fulfillment in life; indeed, “if we
seek the holiness pleasing to God’s eyes, this text offers us one clear
criterion on which we will be judged.” The clear and forceful
words of the Gospel must be put into practice “without any ‘ifs or
buts’ that could lessen their force. Our Lord made it very clear that
holiness cannot be understood or lived apart from these demands.”

29. In the early Christian community, acts of charity were performed on
the basis not of preliminary studies or advance planning, but directly
following Jesus’ example as presented in the Gospel. The Letter of
James deals at length with the problem of relations between rich and
poor, and asks the faithful two questions in order to examine the
authenticity of their faith: “What good is it, my brothers and sisters,
if you say you have faith but do not have works? Can faith save you? If
a brother or sister is naked and lacks daily food, and one of you says
to them, ‘Go in peace; keep warm and eat your fill,’ and yet you do not
supply their bodily needs, what is the good of that? So faith by
itself, if it has no works, is dead” (2:14-17).

30. James goes on to say: “Your gold and silver have rusted, and their
rust will be evidence against you, and it will eat your flesh like
fire. You have laid up treasure for the last days. Listen! The wages of
the laborers who mowed your fields, which you kept back by fraud, cry
out, and the cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord
of hosts. You have lived on the earth in luxury and in pleasure; you
have fattened your hearts in a day of slaughter” (5:3-5). These are
powerful words, even if we would rather not hear them! A similar appeal
can be found in the First Letter of John: “How does God’s love abide in
anyone who has the world’s goods and sees a brother or sister in need
and yet refuses help?” (3:17).

31. The message of God’s word is “so clear and direct, so simple and
eloquent, that no ecclesial interpretation has the right to relativize
it. The Church’s reflection on these texts ought not to obscure or
weaken their force, but urge us to accept their exhortations with
courage and zeal. Why complicate something so simple? Conceptual tools
exist to heighten contact with the realities they seek to explain, not
to distance us from them.” 

32. Indeed, we find a clear ecclesial example of sharing goods and
caring for the poor in the daily life of the first Christian community.
We can recall in particular the way in which the question of the daily
distribution of subsidies to widows was resolved (cf. Acts 6:1-6). This
was not an easy problem, partly because some of these widows, who came
from other countries, were sometimes neglected because they were
foreigners. In fact, the episode recounted in the Acts of the Apostles
highlights a certain discontent on the part of the Hellenists, the Jews
who were culturally Greek. The Apostles do not respond with abstract
words, but by placing charity towards all at the center, reorganizing
assistance to widows by asking the community to seek wise and respected
people to whom they could entrust food distribution, while they take
care of preaching the Word.

33. When Paul went to Jerusalem to consult the Apostles lest somehow he
“should be running or had run in vain” (Gal 2:2), he was asked not to
forget the poor (cf. Gal 2:10). Therefore, he organized various
collections in order to help the poor communities. Among the reasons
for which Paul makes this gesture, the following stands out: “God loves
a cheerful giver” (2 Cor 9:7). The word of God reminds those of us not
normally prone to benevolent and disinterested gestures, that
generosity to the poor actually benefits those who exercise it: God has
a special love for them. In fact, the Bible is full of promises
addressed to those who give generously to others: “Whoever is kind to
the poor lends to the Lord, and will be repaid in full” (Prov 19:17).
“Give, and it will be given to you... for the measure you give will be
the measure you get back” (Lk 6:38). “Then your light shall break forth
like the dawn, and your healing shall spring up quickly” (Is 58:8). Of
this, the early Christians had no doubt.

34. The life of the first ecclesial communities, described in the pages
of the Bible and handed down to us as God’s revealed word, has been
given to us as an example to imitate, but also as a witness to the
faith that works through charity and an enduring inspiration for
generations yet to come. Throughout the centuries, those pages have
moved the hearts of Christians to love and to perform works of charity,
which, like fruitful seeds, never cease to produce a rich harvest.

CHAPTER THREE
A CHURCH FOR THE POOR

35. Three days after his election, my predecessor expressed to the
representatives of the media his desire that care and attention for the
poor be more clearly present in the Church: “How I would like a Church
which is poor and for the poor!” 

36. This desire reflects the understanding that the Church “recognizes
in those who are poor and who suffer, the likeness of its poor and
suffering founder.” Indeed, since the Church is called to
identify with those who are least, at her core “[T]here can be no room
for doubt or for explanations which weaken so clear a message… We have
to state, without mincing words, that there is an inseparable bond
between our faith and the poor.” In this regard, we have
numerous witnesses from disciples of Christ spanning almost two
millennia. 

The true riches of the Church

37. Saint Paul recounts that among the faithful of the nascent
Christian community not many were “wise according to the flesh, not
many were powerful, not many were of noble birth” (1 Cor 1:26).
However, despite their poverty, the early Christians were clearly aware
of the necessity to care for those who were most in need. Already at
the dawn of Christianity, the Apostles laid their hands on seven men
chosen from the community. To a certain extent, they integrated them
into their own ministry, instituting them for the service — diakonía in
Greek — of the poorest (cf. Acts 6:1-5). It is significant that the
first disciple to bear witness to his faith in Christ to the point of
shedding his blood was Stephen, who belonged to this group. In him, the
witness of caring for the poor and of martyrdom are united.

38. A little less than two centuries later, another deacon, Saint
Lawrence, will demonstrate his fidelity to Jesus Christ in a similar
way by uniting martyrdom and service to the poor. From
Saint Ambrose’s account, we learn that Lawrence, a deacon in Rome
during the pontificate of Pope Sixtus II, was forced by the Roman
authorities to turn over the treasures of the Church. “The following
day he brought the poor with him. Questioned about where the promised
treasures might be, he pointed to the poor saying, ‘These are the
treasures of the Church’.” While narrating this event,
Saint Ambrose asks: “What treasures does Jesus have that are more
precious than those in which he loves to show himself?” And,
remembering that ministers of the Church must never neglect the care of
the poor, much less accumulate goods for their own benefit, he says:
“This task must be carried out with sincere faith and wise foresight.
Certainly, if anyone derives personal advantage from it, he commits a
crime; but if he distributes the proceeds to the poor or redeems a
prisoner, he performs a work of mercy.” 

The Fathers of the Church and the Poor

39. From the first centuries, the Fathers of the Church recognized in
the poor a privileged way to reach God, a special way to meet him.
Charity shown to those in need was not only seen as a moral virtue, but
a concrete expression of faith in the incarnate Word. The community of
the faithful, sustained by the strength of the Holy Spirit, was rooted
in being close to the poor, whom they considered not just an
“appendage,” but an essential part of Christ’s living body. For
example, while he was on his way to face martyrdom, Saint Ignatius
of Antioch exhorted the community of Smyrna not to neglect the duty to
carry out acts of charity for those most in need, admonishing them not
to behave like those who oppose God. “But consider those who are of a
different opinion with respect to the grace of Christ, which has come
to us, how opposed they are to the will of God. They have no regard for
love; no care for the widow, or the orphan, or the oppressed; of the
bond, or of the free; of the hungry, or of the thirsty.” The
Bishop of Smyrna, Polycarp, expressly stated that ministers of the
Church should take care of the poor: “And let the presbyters be
compassionate and merciful to all, bringing back those that wander,
visiting all the sick, and not neglecting the widow, the orphan, or the
poor, but always ‘providing for that which is becoming in the sight of
God and man’.” From these two witnesses, we see that the
Church appears as a mother of the poor, a place of welcome and justice.

40. For his part, Saint Justin, who addressed his First Apology to
Emperor Adrian, the Senate and people of Rome, explained that
Christians bring all that they can to those in need because they see
them as brothers and sisters in Christ. Writing about the assembly
gathered in prayer on the first day of the week, he underscored that at
the heart of the Christian liturgy, it is not possible to separate the
worship of God from concern for the poor. Consequently, at a certain
point in the celebration: “they who are well-to-do, and willing, give
what each thinks fit; and what is collected is deposited with the
president, who succors the orphans and widows, and those who, through
sickness or any other cause, are in want, and those who are in bonds,
and the strangers sojourning among us, and in a word takes care of all
who are in need.” This demonstrates that the nascent Church
did not separate belief from social action: faith without witness
through concrete actions was considered dead, as Saint James taught us
(cf. 2:17).

Saint John Chrysostom

41. Among the Eastern Fathers, perhaps the most ardent preacher on
social justice was Saint John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople from the late 300s to the early 400s. In his homilies,
he exhorted the faithful to recognize Christ in the needy: “Do you wish
to honor the body of Christ? Do not allow it to be despised in its
members, that is, in the poor, who have no clothes to cover themselves.
Do not honor Christ’s body here in church with silk fabrics, while
outside you neglect it when it suffers from cold and nakedness… [The
body of Christ on the altar] does not need cloaks, but pure souls;
while the one outside needs much care. Let us therefore learn to think
of and honor Christ as he wishes. For the most pleasing honor we can
give to the one we want to venerate is that of doing what he himself
desires, not what we devise… So you too, give him the honor he has
commanded, and let the poor benefit from your riches. God does not need
golden vessels, but golden souls.” Affirming with crystal
clarity that, if the faithful do not encounter Christ in the poor who
stand at the door, they will not be able to worship him even at the
altar, he continues: “What advantage does Christ gain if the
sacrificial table is laden with golden vessels, while he himself dies
of hunger in the person of the poor? Feed the hungry first, and only
afterward adorn the altar with what remains.” He understood
the Eucharist, therefore, as a sacramental expression of the charity
and justice that both preceded and accompanied it. That same charity
and justice should perpetuate the Eucharist through love and attention
to the poor.

42. Consequently, charity is not optional but a requirement of true
worship. Chrysostom vehemently denounced excessive wealth connected
with indifference for the poor. The attention due to them, rather than
a mere social requirement, is a condition for salvation, which gives
unjust wealth a condemnatory weight. “It is very cold and the poor man
lies in rags, dying, freezing, shivering, with an appearance and
clothing that should move you. You, however, red in the face and drunk,
pass by. And how do you expect God to deliver you from misfortune?...
You often adorn an unfeeling corpse, which no longer understands honor,
with many varied and gilded garments. Yet you despise the one who feels
pain, who is torn apart, tortured, tormented by hunger and cold.”
This profound sense of social justice leads him to affirm
that “not giving to the poor is stealing from them, defrauding them of
their lives, because what we have belongs to them.” 

Saint Augustine

43. Augustine’s spiritual guide was Saint Ambrose, who
insisted on the ethical requirement to share material goods: “What you
give to the poor is not your property, but theirs. Why have you
appropriated what was given for common use?” For the Bishop
of Milan, almsgiving is justice restored, not a gesture of paternalism.
In his preaching, mercy takes on a prophetic character: he denounces
structures that accumulate things and reaffirms communion as the
Church’s vocation.

44. Formed in this tradition, the holy Bishop of Hippo taught for
his part about the preferential love for the poor. A vigilant pastor
and theologian of rare insight, he realizes that true ecclesial
communion is expressed also in the communion of goods. In his
Commentaries on the Psalms, he reminds us that true Christians do not
neglect love for those most in need: “Observing your brothers and
sisters, you know if they are in need, but if Christ dwells in you,
also be charitable to strangers.” This sharing of goods
therefore stems from theological charity and has as its ultimate goal
the love of Christ. For Augustine, the poor are not just people to
be helped, but the sacramental presence of the Lord.

45. The Doctor of Grace saw caring for the poor as concrete proof of
the sincerity of faith. Anyone who says they love God and has no
compassion for the needy is lying (cf. 1 Jn 4:20). Commenting on Jesus’
encounter with the rich young man and the “treasure in heaven” reserved
for those who give their possessions to the poor (cf. Mt 19:21),
Augustine puts the following words in the Lord’s mouth: “I received the
earth, I will give heaven; I received temporal goods, I will give back
eternal goods; I received bread, I will give life… I have been given
hospitality, but I will give a home; I was visited when I was sick, but
I will give health; I was visited in prison, but I will give freedom.
The bread you have given to my poor has been consumed, but the bread I
will give will not only refresh you, but will never end.” The
Almighty will not be outdone in generosity to those who serve the
people most in need: the greater the love for the poor, the greater the
reward from God.

46. This Christocentric and deeply ecclesial perspective leads us to
affirm that offerings, when born of love, not only alleviate the needs
of one’s brother or sister, but also purify the heart of the giver, if
he or she is willing to change. Indeed, in the words of
Pseudo-Augustine: “almsgiving can be beneficial to you in erasing past
sins, if you have amended your ways.” It is, so to speak, the
ordinary path to conversion for those who wish to follow Christ with an
undivided heart.

47. In a Church that recognizes in the poor the face of Christ and in
material goods the instrument of charity, Augustine’s thought remains a
sure light. Today, fidelity to Augustine’s teachings requires not only
the study of his works, but also a readiness to live radically his call
to conversion, which necessarily includes the service of charity.

48. Many other Fathers of the Church, both Eastern and Western, have
spoken about the primacy of attention to the poor in the life and
mission of every Christian. From this perspective, in summary, it can
be said that patristic theology was practical, aiming at a Church that
was poor and for the poor, recalling that the Gospel is proclaimed
correctly only when it impels us to touch the flesh of the least among
us, and warning that doctrinal rigor without mercy is empty talk.

Care of the sick

49. Christian compassion has manifested itself in a particular way in
the care of the sick and suffering. Based on the signs present in
Jesus’ public ministry — the healing of the blind, lepers and
paralytics — the Church understands that caring for the sick, in whom
she readily recognizes the crucified Lord, is an important part of her
mission. During a plague in the city of Carthage, where he was Bishop,
Saint Cyprian reminded Christians of the importance of caring for the
sick: “This pestilence and plague, which seems so horrible and deadly,
searches out the righteousness of each one, and examines the minds of
the human race, to see whether the healthy serve the sick; whether
relatives love each other with sincerity; whether masters have pity on
their sick servants; whether doctors do not abandon the sick who beg
for help.” The Christian tradition of visiting the sick,
washing their wounds, and comforting the afflicted is not simply a
philanthropic endeavor, but an ecclesial action through which the
members of the Church “touch the suffering flesh of Christ.” 

50. In the sixteenth century, Saint John of God founded the Hospitaller
Order that bears his name, creating model hospitals that welcomed
everyone, regardless of social or economic status. His famous
expression, “Do good, my brothers!” became a motto for active charity
towards the sick. At the same time, Saint Camillus de Lellis founded
the Order of Ministers of the Sick — the Camillians — taking on the
mission of serving the sick with total dedication. His rule commands:
“Each person should ask the Lord for a motherly affection for their
neighbor so that we may serve them with all charity, both in soul and
body, because we desire, with the grace of God, to serve all the sick
with the affection that a loving mother has for her only sick child.”
In hospitals, on battlefields, in prisons, and on the
streets, the Camillians have embodied the mercy of Christ the
Physician.

51. Caring for the sick with maternal affection, as a mother cares for
her child, many consecrated women have played an even greater role in
providing healthcare to the poor. The Daughters of Charity of Saint
Vincent de Paul, the Hospital Sisters, the Little Sisters of Divine
Providence, and many other women’s congregations have become a maternal
and discreet presence in hospitals, nursing homes and retirement homes.
They have brought comfort, a listening ear, a presence, and above all,
tenderness. They have built, often with their own hands, healthcare
facilities in areas lacking medical assistance. They taught hygiene,
assisted in childbirth and administered medicine with natural wisdom
and deep faith. Their homes became oases of dignity where no one was
excluded. The touch of compassion was the first medicine. Saint Louise
de Marillac wrote to her sisters, the Daughters of Charity, reminding
them that “they have been singularly blessed by God for the service of
the sick poor of the hospitals.” 

52. Today, this legacy continues in Catholic hospitals, healthcare
facilities in remote areas, clinics operating in jungles, shelters for
drug addicts and in field hospitals in war zones. The Christian
presence among the sick reveals that salvation is not an abstract idea,
but concrete action. In the act of healing a wound, the Church
proclaims that the Kingdom of God begins among the most vulnerable. In
doing so, she remains faithful to the One who said, “I was sick and you
visited me” (Mt 25:36). When the Church kneels beside a leper, a
malnourished child or an anonymous dying person, she fulfills her
deepest vocation: to love the Lord where he is most disfigured.

Care of the poor in monastic life

53. Monastic life, which originated in the silence of the desert, was
from the outset a witness to solidarity. Monks and nuns left everything
— wealth, prestige, family — not only because they despised worldly
goods — contemptus mundi — but also to encounter the poor Christ in
this radical detachment. Saint Basil the Great, in his Rule, saw no
contradiction between the monks’ life of prayer and contemplation and
their work on behalf of the poor. For him, hospitality and care for the
needy were an integral part of monastic spirituality, and monks, even
after having left everything to embrace poverty, had to help the
poorest with their work, because “in order to have enough to help the
needy… it is clear that we must work diligently... This way of life is
profitable not only for subduing the body, but also for charity towards
our neighbor, so that through us God may provide enough for our weaker
brothers and sisters.” 

54. In Caesarea, where he was Bishop, he built a place known as
Basiliad, which included lodgings, hospitals and schools for the poor
and sick. The monk, therefore, was not only an ascetic, but also a
servant. Basil thus demonstrated that to be close to God, one must be
close to the poor. Concrete love was the criterion of holiness. Praying
and caring, contemplating and healing, writing and welcoming:
everything was an expression of the same love for Christ.

55. In the West, Saint Benedict of Norcia formulated a Rule that would
become the backbone of European monastic spirituality. Welcoming the
poor and pilgrims occupies a prominent place in the document: “The poor
and pilgrims are to be received with all care and hospitality, for it
is in them that Christ is received.” These were not just
words: for centuries Benedictine monasteries were places of refuge for
widows, abandoned children, pilgrims and beggars. For Benedict,
community life was a school of charity. Manual labor not only had a
practical function, but also formed the heart for service. Sharing
among the monks, caring for the sick and listening to the most
vulnerable prepared them to welcome Christ who comes in the person of
the poor and the stranger. Today, Benedictine monastic hospitality
remains a sign of a Church that opens its doors, welcomes without
asking and heals without demanding anything in return.

56. Over time, Benedictine monasteries became places for overcoming the
culture of exclusion. Monks and nuns cultivated the land, produced
food, prepared medicines and offered them, with simplicity, to those
most in need. Their silent work was the leaven of a new civilization,
where the poor were not a problem to be solved, but brothers and
sisters to be welcomed. The rule of sharing, working together and
helping the vulnerable established an economy of solidarity, in
contrast to the logic of accumulation. The monks’ witness showed that
voluntary poverty, far from being misery, is a path of freedom and
communion. They did not limit themselves to helping the poor: they
became their neighbors, brothers and sisters in the same Lord. In the
cells and cloisters, they created a mysticism of God’s presence in the
little ones.

57. In addition to providing material assistance, monasteries played a
fundamental role in the cultural and spiritual formation of the
humblest. In times of plague, war and famine, they were places where
the needy found bread and medicine, but also dignity and a voice. It
was there that orphans were educated, apprentices received training and
ordinary people were taught agricultural techniques and how to read.
Knowledge was shared as a gift and a responsibility. The abbot was both
teacher and father, and the monastic school was a place of freedom
through truth. Indeed, as John Cassian writes, the monk must be
characterized by “humility of heart… which leads not to knowledge that
puffs up, but to knowledge that enlightens through the fullness of
charity.” By forming consciences and transmitting wisdom,
monks contributed to a Christian pedagogy of inclusion. Culture, marked
by faith, was shared with simplicity. Knowledge, illuminated by
charity, became service. Monastic life thus revealed itself as a style
of holiness and a concrete way to transform society.

58. The monastic tradition teaches us that prayer and charity, silence
and service, cells and hospitals form a single spiritual fabric. The
monastery is a place of listening and action, of worship and sharing.
Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, the great Cistercian reformer, “firmly
recalled the need for a sober and measured life, in the refectory as in
monastic clothing and buildings, recommending the support and care of
the poor.” For him, compassion was not an option, but the
true path of following Christ. Monastic life, therefore, if faithful to
its original vocation, shows that the Church is fully the bride of the
Lord only when she is also the sister of the poor. The cloister is not
only a refuge from the world, but a school where one learns to serve it
better. Where monks and nuns have opened their doors to the poor, the
Church has revealed with humility and firmness that contemplation does
not exclude mercy, but demands it as its purest fruit.

Freeing prisoners

59. Since apostolic times, the Church has seen the liberation of the
oppressed as a sign of the Kingdom of God. Jesus himself proclaimed at
the beginning of his public ministry: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to bring good news to the poor. He has
sent me to proclaim release to the captives” (Lk 4:18). The early
Christians, even in precarious conditions, prayed for and assisted
their brothers and sisters who were prisoners, as the Acts of the
Apostles (cf. 12:5; 24:23) and various writings of the Fathers attest.
This mission of liberation has continued throughout the centuries
through concrete actions, especially when the tragedy of slavery and
imprisonment has marked entire societies.

60. Between the late twelfth and the early thirteenth centuries, when
many Christians were captured in the Mediterranean or enslaved in wars,
two religious orders arose: the Order of the Most Holy Trinity and of
the Captives (Trinitarians), founded by Saint John of Matha and Saint
Felix of Valois, and the Order of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mercy
(Mercedarians), founded by Saint Peter Nolasco with the support of the
Dominican Saint Raymond of Peñafort. These communities of consecrated
persons were born with the specific charism of freeing Christians who
had been enslaved, placing their own possessions at the disposal of the
enslaved and many times offering their own lives in exchange.
The Trinitarians, with their motto Gloria tibi Trinitas et captivis
libertas (Glory to you, O Trinity, and liberty to the captives), and
the Mercedarians, who added a fourth vow to the religious
vows of poverty, chastity and obedience, testified that charity can be
heroic. The liberation of prisoners is an expression of Trinitarian
love: a God who frees not only from spiritual slavery but also from
concrete oppression. The act of rescuing someone from slavery and
captivity is seen as an extension of Christ’s redemptive sacrifice,
whose blood is the price of our redemption (cf. 1 Cor 6:20).

61. The original spirituality of these orders was deeply rooted in
contemplation of the cross. Christ is the Redeemer of prisoners par
excellence, and the Church, his Body, prolongs this mystery in time.
Religious did not see redemption as a political or economic
action, but as a quasi-liturgical act, the sacramental offering of
themselves. Many gave their own bodies to replace prisoners, literally
fulfilling the commandment: “No one has greater love than this, to lay
down one’s life for one’s friends” ( Jn 15:13). The tradition of these
orders did not come to an end. On the contrary, it inspired new forms
of action in the face of modern forms of slavery: human trafficking,
forced labor, sexual exploitation and various forms of dependency.
Christian charity is liberating when it becomes incarnate.
Likewise, the mission of the Church, when she is faithful to her Lord,
is at all times to proclaim liberation. Even today, when “millions of
people — children, women and men of all ages — are deprived of their
freedom and forced to live in conditions akin to slavery,” 
this legacy is carried on by these orders and other institutions and
congregations working in urban peripheries, conflict zones and
migration routes. When the Church bends down to break the new chains
that bind the poor, she becomes a paschal sign.

62. We cannot conclude this reflection on people deprived of their
freedom without mentioning those in various prisons and detention
centers. In this regard, we recall the words that Pope Francis
addressed to a group of prisoners: “For me, entering a prison is always
an important moment, because prison is a place of great humanity...
Humanity that is tried, sometimes worn down by difficulties, guilt,
judgments, misunderstandings, suffering, but at the same time full of
strength, desire for forgiveness, and a desire for redemption.”
This desire, among other things, has also been taken up by
the orders devoted to the ransom of prisoners as a preferential service
to the Church. As Saint Paul proclaimed: “For freedom Christ has set us
free” ( Gal 5:1). This freedom is not only interior: it manifests
itself in history as love that cares for and frees us from every bond
of slavery.

Witnesses of evangelical poverty

63. In the thirteenth century, faced with the growth of cities, the
concentration of wealth and the emergence of new forms of poverty, the
Holy Spirit gave rise to a new type of consecration in the Church: the
mendicant orders. Unlike the stable monastic model, mendicants adopted
an itinerant life, without personal or communal property, entrusting
themselves entirely to providence. They did not merely serve the poor:
they made themselves poor with them. They saw the city as a new desert
and the marginalized as new spiritual teachers. These orders, such as
the Franciscans, Dominicans, Augustinians and Carmelites, represented
an evangelical revolution, in which a simple and poor lifestyle became
a prophetic sign for mission, reviving the experience of the first
Christian community (cf. Acts 4:32). The witness of the mendicants
challenged both clerical opulence and the coldness of urban society.

64. Saint Francis of Assisi became the icon of this spiritual
springtime. By embracing poverty, he wanted to imitate Christ, who was
poor, naked and crucified. In his Rule, he asks that “the brothers
should not appropriate anything, neither house, nor place, nor anything
else. And as pilgrims and strangers in this world, serving the Lord in
poverty and humility, they should go about begging with confidence, and
should not be ashamed, because the Lord made himself poor for us in
this world.” His life was one of continuous self-emptying:
from the palace to the leper, from eloquence to silence, from
possession to total gift. Francis did not found a social service
organization, but an evangelical fraternity. In the poor, he saw
brothers and sisters, living images of the Lord. His mission was to be
with them, and he did so through a solidarity that overcame distances
and a compassionate love. Francis’ poverty was relational: it led him
to become neighbor, equal to, or indeed lesser than others. His
holiness sprang from the conviction that Christ can only be truly
received by giving oneself generously to one’s brothers and sisters.

65. Saint Clare of Assisi, who was inspired by Francis, founded the
Order of Poor Ladies, later called the Poor Clares. Her spiritual
struggle consisted in faithfully maintaining the ideal of radical
poverty. She refused the papal privileges that could have guaranteed
material security for her monastery and, with firmness, obtained from
Pope Gregory IX the so-called Privilegium Paupertatis, which
guaranteed the right to live without any material goods. This
choice expressed her total trust in God and her awareness that
voluntary poverty was a form of freedom and prophecy. Clare taught her
sisters that Christ was their only inheritance and that nothing should
obscure their communion with him. Her prayerful and hidden life was a
cry against worldliness and a silent defense of the poor and forgotten.

66. Saint Dominic de Guzmán, a contemporary of Francis, founded the
Order of Preachers, with a different charism but the same radicalism of
life. He wanted to proclaim the Gospel with the authority that comes
from a life of poverty, convinced that the Truth needs witnesses of
integrity. The example of poverty in their lives accompanied the Word
they preached. Free from the weight of earthly goods, the Dominican
Friars were better able to dedicate themselves to their principal work
of preaching. They went to the cities, especially the universities, in
order to teach the truth about God. In their dependence on
others, they showed that faith is not imposed but offered. And by
living among the poor, they learned the truth of the Gospel “from
below,” as disciples of the humiliated Christ.

67. The mendicant orders were therefore a living response to exclusion
and indifference. They did not expressly propose social reforms, but an
individual and communal conversion to the logic of the Kingdom. For
them, poverty was not a consequence of a scarcity of goods, but a free
choice: to make themselves small in order to welcome the small. As
Thomas of Celano said of Francis: “He showed that he loved the poor
intensely… He often stripped himself naked to clothe the poor, whom he
sought to resemble.” Beggars became the symbol of a pilgrim,
humble and fraternal Church, living among the poor not to proselytize
but as an expression of their true identity. They teach us that the
Church is a light when she strips herself of everything, and that
holiness passes through a humble heart devoted to the least among us.

The Church and the education of the poor

68. Addressing educators, Pope Francis recalled that education has
always been one of the highest expressions of Christian charity: “Yours
is a mission full of obstacles as well as joys... A mission of love,
because you cannot teach without loving.” In this sense,
since ancient times, Christians have understood that knowledge
liberates, gives dignity, and brings us closer to the truth. For the
Church, teaching the poor was an act of justice and faith. Inspired by
the example of the Master who taught people divine and human truths,
she took on the mission of forming children and young people,
especially the poorest, in truth and love. This mission took shape with
the founding of congregations dedicated to education.

69. In the sixteenth century, Saint Joseph Calasanz, struck by the lack
of education and training among the poor young people of Rome,
established Europe’s first free public school in some rooms adjacent to
the church of Santa Dorotea in Trastevere. This was the seed from which
the Poor Clerics Regular of the Mother of God of the Pious Schools,
known as the Piarists, would later emerge and develop, though not
without difficulty. Their goal was that of transmitting to young people
“not only secular knowledge but also the wisdom of the Gospel, teaching
them to recognize, in their personal lives and in history, the loving
action of God the Creator and Redeemer.” In fact, we can
consider this courageous priest as the “true founder of the modern
Catholic school, aimed at the integral formation of people and open to
all.” Inspired by the same sensitivity, Saint John Baptist de
La Salle, realizing the injustice caused by the exclusion of the
children of workers and ordinary people from the educational system of
France at that time, founded the Brothers of the Christian Schools in
the seventeenth century, with the ideal of offering them free
education, solid formation, and a fraternal environment. De La Salle
saw the classroom as a place for human development, but also for
conversion. In his colleges, prayer, method, discipline and sharing
were combined. Each child was considered a unique gift from God, and
the act of teaching was a service to the Kingdom of God.

70. In the nineteenth century, also in France, Saint Marcellin
Champagnat founded the Institute of the Marist Brothers of the Schools.
“He was sensitive to the spiritual and educational needs of his time,
especially to religious ignorance and the situation of neglect
experienced in a particular way by the young.” He dedicated
himself wholeheartedly to the mission of educating and evangelizing
children and young people, especially those most in need, during a
period when access to education continued to be the privilege of a few.
In the same spirit, Saint John Bosco began the great work of the
Salesians in Italy based on the three principles of the “preventive
method” — reason, religion, and loving kindness. Blessed
Antonio Rosmini founded the Institute of Charity, in which
“intellectual charity” was placed alongside “material charity,” with
“spiritual-pastoral charity” at the top, as an indispensable dimension
of any charitable action aimed at the good and integral development of
the person. 

71. Many female congregations were protagonists of this pedagogical
revolution. Founded in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the
Ursulines, the Sisters of the Company of Mary Our Lady, the Maestre Pie
and many others, stepped into the spaces where the state was absent.
They created schools in small villages, suburbs and working-class
neighborhoods. In particular, the education of girls became a priority.
The religious sisters taught literacy, evangelized, took care of
practical matters of daily life, elevated their spirits through the
cultivation of the arts, and, above all, formed consciences. Their
pedagogy was simple: closeness, patience and gentleness. They taught by
the example of their lives before teaching with words. In times of
widespread illiteracy and systemic exclusion, these consecrated women
were beacons of hope. Their mission was to form hearts, teach people to
think and promote dignity. By combining a life of piety and dedication
to others, they fought abandonment with the tenderness of those who
educate in the name of Christ.

72. For the Christian faith, the education of the poor is not a favor
but a duty. Children have a right to knowledge as a fundamental
requirement for the recognition of human dignity. Teaching them affirms
their value, giving them the tools to transform their reality.
Christian tradition considers knowledge a gift from God and a community
responsibility. Christian education does not only form professionals,
but also people open to goodness, beauty and truth. Catholic schools,
therefore, when they are faithful to their name, are places of
inclusion, integral formation and human development. By combining faith
and culture, they sow the seeds of the future, honor the image of God
and build a better society.

Accompanying migrants

73. The experience of migration accompanies the history of the People
of God. Abraham sets out without knowing where he is going; Moses leads
the pilgrim people through the desert; Mary and Joseph flee with the
child Jesus to Egypt. Christ himself, who “came to what was his own,
and his own people did not accept him” (Jn 1:11), lived among us as a
stranger. For this reason, the Church has always recognized in migrants
a living presence of the Lord who, on the day of judgment, will say to
those on his right: “I was a stranger and you welcomed me” (Mt 25:35).

74. In the nineteenth century, when millions of Europeans emigrated in
search of better living conditions, two great saints distinguished
themselves in the pastoral care of migrants: Saint John Baptist
Scalabrini and Saint Frances Xavier Cabrini. Scalabrini, Bishop of
Piacenza, founded the Missionaries of Saint Charles to accompany
migrants to their destinations, offering them spiritual, legal and
material assistance. He saw migrants as recipients of a new
evangelization, warning of the risks of exploitation and loss of faith
in a foreign land. Responding generously to the charism that the Lord
had given him, “Scalabrini looked forward to a world and a Church
without barriers, where no one was a foreigner.” Saint
Frances Cabrini, born in Italy and a naturalized American, was the
first citizen of the United States of America to be canonized. To
fulfill her mission of assisting migrants, she crossed the Atlantic
several times. “Armed with remarkable boldness, she started schools,
hospitals and orphanages from nothing for the masses of the poor who
ventured into the new world in search of work. Not knowing the language
and lacking the wherewithal to find a respectable place in American
society, they were often victims of the unscrupulous. Her motherly
heart, which allowed her no rest, reached out to them everywhere: in
hovels, prisons and mines.” In the Holy Year of 1950, Pope
Pius XII proclaimed her Patroness of All Migrants. 

75. The Church’s tradition of working for and with migrants continues,
and today this service is expressed in initiatives such as refugee
reception centers, border missions and the efforts of Caritas
Internationalis and other institutions. Contemporary teaching clearly
reaffirms this commitment. Pope Francis has recalled that the
Church’s mission to migrants and refugees is even broader, insisting
that “our response to the challenges posed by contemporary migration
can be summed up in four verbs: welcome, protect, promote and
integrate. Yet these verbs do not apply only to migrants and refugees.
They describe the Church’s mission to all those living in the
existential peripheries, who need to be welcomed, protected, promoted
and integrated.” He also said: “Every human being is a child
of God! He or she bears the image of Christ! We ourselves need to see,
and then to enable others to see, that migrants and refugees do not
only represent a problem to be solved, but are brothers and sisters to
be welcomed, respected and loved. They are an occasion that Providence
gives us to help build a more just society, a more perfect democracy, a
more united country, a more fraternal world and a more open and
evangelical Christian community.” The Church, like a mother,
accompanies those who are walking. Where the world sees threats, she
sees children; where walls are built, she builds bridges. She knows
that her proclamation of the Gospel is credible only when it is
translated into gestures of closeness and welcome. And she knows that
in every rejected migrant, it is Christ himself who knocks at the door
of the community.

At the side of the least among us

76. Christian holiness often flourishes in the most forgotten and
wounded places of humanity. The poorest of the poor — those who lack
not only material goods but also a voice and the recognition of their
dignity — have a special place in God’s heart. They are the beloved of
the Gospel, the heirs to the Kingdom (cf. Lk 6:20). It is in them that
Christ continues to suffer and rise again. It is in them that the
Church rediscovers her call to show her most authentic self.

77. Saint Teresa of Calcutta, canonized in 2016, has become a universal
icon of charity lived to the fullest extent in favor of the most
destitute, those discarded by society. Foundress of the Missionaries of
Charity, she dedicated her life to the dying abandoned on the streets
of India. She gathered the rejected, washed their wounds and
accompanied them to the moment of death with the tenderness of prayer.
Her love for the poorest of the poor meant that she did not only take
care of their material needs, but also proclaimed the good news of the
Gospel to them: “We are wanting to proclaim the good news to the poor
that God loves them, that we love them, that they are somebody to us,
that they too have been created by the same loving hand of God, to love
and to be loved. Our poor people are great people, are very lovable
people, they do not need our pity and sympathy, they need our
understanding love. They need our respect; they need that we treat them
with dignity.” All this came from a deep spirituality that
saw service to the poorest as the fruit of prayer and love, the source
of true peace, as Pope John Paul II reminded the pilgrims who came
to Rome for her beatification: “Where did Mother Teresa find the
strength to place herself completely at the service of others? She
found it in prayer and in the silent contemplation of Jesus Christ, his
Holy Face, his Sacred Heart. She herself said as much: ‘The fruit of
silence is prayer; the fruit of prayer is faith; the fruit of faith is
love; the fruit of love is service.’ It was prayer that filled her
heart with Christ’s own peace and enabled her to radiate that peace to
others.” Teresa did not consider herself a philanthropist or
an activist, but a bride of Christ crucified, serving with total love
her suffering brothers and sisters.

78. In Brazil, Saint Dulce of the Poor — known as “the good angel of
Bahia” — embodied the same evangelical spirit with Brazilian
characteristics. Referring to her and two other religious women
canonized during the same celebration, Pope Francis recalled their
love for the most marginalized members of society and said that the new
saints “show us that the consecrated life is a journey of love at the
existential peripheries of the world.” Sister Dulce responded
to precariousness with creativity, obstacles with tenderness and need
with unshakeable faith. She began by taking in the sick in a chicken
coop and from there founded one of the largest social services in the
country. She assisted thousands of people a day, without ever losing
her gentleness, making herself poor with the poor for the love of the
Poorest One. She lived with little, prayed fervently and served with
joy. Her faith did not distance her from the world, but drew her even
more deeply into the pain of the least among us.

79. We could also mention individuals such as Saint Benedict Menni and
the Sisters Hospitallers of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, who worked
alongside people with disabilities; Saint Charles de Foucauld among the
communities of the Sahara; Saint Katharine Drexel for the most
underprivileged groups in North America; Sister Emmanuelle, with the
garbage collectors in the Ezbet El Nakhl neighborhood of Cairo; and
many others. Each in their own way discovered that the poorest are not
only objects of our compassion, but teachers of the Gospel. It is not a
question of “bringing” God to them, but of encountering him among them.
All of these examples teach us that serving the poor is not a gesture
to be made “from above,” but an encounter between equals, where Christ
is revealed and adored. Saint John Paul II reminded us that “there
is a special presence of Christ in the poor, and this requires the
Church to make a preferential option for them.” Therefore,
when the Church bends down to care for the poor, she assumes her
highest posture.

Popular Movements

80. We must also recognize that, throughout centuries of Christian
history, helping the poor and advocating for their rights has not only
involved individuals, families, institutions, or religious communities.
There have been, and still are, various popular movements made up of
lay people and led by popular leaders, who have often been viewed with
suspicion and even persecuted. I am referring to “all those persons who
journey, not as individuals, but as a closely-bound community of all
and for all, one that refuses to leave the poor and vulnerable
behind... ‘Popular’ leaders, then, are those able to involve
everyone... They do not shun or fear those young people who have
experienced hurt or borne the weight of the cross.” 

81. These popular leaders know that solidarity “also means fighting
against the structural causes of poverty and inequality; of the lack of
work, land and housing; and of the denial of social and labor rights.
It means confronting the destructive effects of the empire of money…
Solidarity, understood in its deepest sense, is a way of making
history, and this is what the popular movements are doing.”
For this reason, when different institutions think about the
needs of the poor, it is necessary to “include popular movements and
invigorate local, national and international governing structures with
that torrent of moral energy that springs from including the excluded
in the building of a common destiny.” Popular movements, in
fact, invite us to overcome “the idea of social policies being a policy
for the poor, but never with the poor and never of the poor, much less
part of a project which can bring people back together.” If
politicians and professionals do not listen to them, “democracy
atrophies, turns into a slogan, a formality; it loses its
representative character and becomes disembodied, since it leaves out
the people in their daily struggle for dignity, in the building of
their future.” The same must be said of the institutions of
the Church.

CHAPTER FOUR
A HISTORY THAT CONTINUES

The century of the Church’s Social Doctrine

82. The acceleration of technological and social change in the past two
centuries, with all its contradictions and conflicts, not only had an
impact on the lives of the poor but also became the object of debate
and reflection on their part. The various movements of workers, women
and young people, and the fight against racial discrimination, gave
rise to a new appreciation of the dignity of those on the margins of
society. The Church’s social doctrine also emerged from this
matrix. Its analysis of Christian revelation in the context of modern
social, labor, economic and cultural issues would not have been
possible without the contribution of the laity, men and women alike,
who grappled with the great issues of their time. At their side were
those men and women religious who embodied a Church forging ahead in
new directions. The epochal change we are now undergoing makes even
more necessary a constant interaction between the faithful and the
Church’s Magisterium, between ordinary citizens and experts, between
individuals and institutions. Here too, it needs to be acknowledged
once more that reality is best viewed from the sidelines, and that the
poor are possessed of unique insights indispensable to the Church and
to humanity as a whole.

83. The Church’s Magisterium in the past 150 years is a veritable
treasury of significant teachings concerning the poor. The Bishops of
Rome have given voice to new insights refined through a process of
ecclesial discernment. By way of example, in his Encyclical Letter
Rerum Novarum, Leo XIII addressed the labor question,
pointing to the intolerable living conditions of many industrial
workers and arguing for the establishment of a just social order. Other
popes also spoke on this theme. Saint John XXIII, in his
Encyclical Mater et Magistra (1961), called for justice on a
global scale: rich countries could no longer remain indifferent to
countries suffering from hunger and extreme poverty; instead, they were
called upon to assist them generously with all their goods.

84. The Second Vatican Council represented a milestone in the
Church’s understanding of the poor in God’s saving plan. Although this
theme remained marginal in the preparatory documents, Saint John
XXIII, in his Radio Message of 11 September 1962, a month before the
opening of the Council, called attention to the issue. In his memorable
words, “the Church presents herself as she is and as she wishes to be:
the Church of all and in particular the Church of the poor.” 
The intense efforts of bishops, theologians and experts concerned with
the renewal of the Church — with the support of Saint John
XXIII himself — gave the Council a new direction. The centrality of
Christ in these considerations both on a doctrinal and social level
would prove fundamental. Many Council Fathers supported this approach,
as eloquently expressed by Cardinal Lercaro in his intervention of 6
December 1962: “The mystery of Christ in the Church has always been and
today is, in a particular way, the mystery of Christ in the poor.”
He went on to say that, “this is not simply one theme among
others, but in some sense the only theme of the Council as a whole.”
The Archbishop of Bologna, in preparing the text for this
intervention, noted the following: “This is the hour of the poor, of
the millions of the poor throughout the world. This is the hour of the
mystery of the Church as mother of the poor. This is the hour of the
mystery of Christ, present especially in the poor.” There was
a growing sense of the need for a new image of Church, one simpler and
more sober, embracing the entire people of God and its presence in
history. A Church more closely resembling her Lord than worldly powers
and working to foster a concrete commitment on the part of all humanity
to solving the immense problem of poverty in the world.

85. At the opening of the second session of the Council, Saint
Paul VI took up this concern voiced by his predecessor, namely
that the Church looks with particular attention “to the poor, the
needy, the afflicted, the hungry, the suffering, the imprisoned, that
is, she looks to all humanity that suffers and weeps: she is part of
them by evangelical right.” In his General Audience of 11
November 1964, he pointed out that “the poor are representatives of
Christ,” and compared the image of the Lord in the poor to that seen in
the Pope. He affirmed this truth with these words: “The representation
of Christ in the poor is universal; every poor person reflects Christ;
that of the Pope is personal... The poor man and Peter can be one in
the same person, clothed in a double representation; that of poverty
and that of authority.” In this way, the intrinsic link
between the Church and the poor was expressed symbolically and with
unprecedented clarity.

86. The Pastoral Constitution Gaudium et Spes, building on the
teachings of the Church Fathers, forcefully reaffirms the universal
destination of earthly goods and the social function of property that
derives from it. The Constitution states that “God destined the earth
and all it contains for all people and nations so that all created
things would be shared fairly by all humankind under the guidance of
justice tempered by charity… In their use of things people should
regard the external goods they lawfully possess as not just their own
but common to others as well, in the sense that they can benefit others
as well as themselves. Therefore, everyone has the right to possess a
sufficient amount of the earth’s goods for themselves and their family…
Persons in extreme necessity are entitled to take what they need from
the riches of others… By its nature, private property has a social
dimension that is based on the law of the common destination of earthly
goods. Whenever the social aspect is forgotten, ownership can often
become the object of greed and a source of serious disorder.” 
This conviction was reiterated by Saint Paul VI in his Encyclical
Populorum Progressio. There we read that no one can feel
authorized to “appropriate surplus goods solely for his [or her] own
private use when others lack the bare necessities of life.” 
In his address to the United Nations, Pope Paul VI spoke as the
advocate of poor peoples and urged the international
community to build a world of solidarity.

87. With Saint John Paul II, the Church’s preferential
relationship with the poor was consolidated, particularly from a
doctrinal standpoint. His teaching saw in the option for the poor a
“special form of primacy in the exercise of Christian charity, to which
the whole tradition of the Church bears witness.” In his
Encyclical Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, he went on to say: “Today,
furthermore, given the worldwide dimension which the social question
has assumed, this love of preference for the poor, and the decisions
which it inspires in us, cannot but embrace the immense multitudes of
the hungry, the needy, the homeless, those without medical care and,
above all, those without hope of a better future. It is impossible not
to take account of the existence of these realities. To ignore them
would mean becoming like the ‘rich man’ who pretended not to know the
beggar Lazarus lying at his gate (cf. Lk 16:19-31).” Saint
John Paul II’s teaching on work is likewise important for our
consideration of the active role that the poor ought to play in the
renewal of the Church and society, thus leaving behind a certain
“paternalism” that limited itself to satisfying only the immediate
needs of the poor. In his Encyclical Laborem Exercens, he
forthrightly stated that “human work is a key , probably the essential
key , to the whole social question.” 

88. Amid the multiple crises that marked the beginning of the third
millennium, the teaching of Benedict XVI took a more distinctly
political turn. Hence, in the Encyclical Caritas in Veritate, he
affirms that “the more we strive to secure a common good corresponding
to the real needs of our neighbors, the more effectively we love them.”
He observed, moreover, that “hunger is not so much dependent
on lack of material things as on shortage of social resources, the most
important of which are institutional. What is missing, in other words,
is a network of economic institutions capable of guaranteeing regular
access to sufficient food and water for nutritional needs, and also
capable of addressing the primary needs and necessities ensuing from
genuine food crises, whether due to natural causes or political
irresponsibility, nationally and internationally.” 

89. Pope Francis recognized that in recent decades, alongside the
teachings of the Bishops of Rome, national and regional Bishops’
Conferences have increasingly spoken out. He could personally attest,
for example, to the particular commitment of the Latin American
episcopate to rethinking the Church’s relationship with the poor. In
the immediate post-conciliar period, in almost all Latin American
countries, there was a strong sense of the Church’s need to identify
with the poor and to participate actively in securing their freedom.
The Church was moved by the masses of the poor suffering from
unemployment, underemployment, unjust wages and sub-standard living
conditions. The martyrdom of Saint Oscar Romero, the Archbishop of San
Salvador, was a powerful witness and an inspiration for the Church. He
had made his own the plight of the vast majority of his flock and made
them the center of his pastoral vision. The Conferences of the Latin
American Bishops held in Medellín, Puebla, Santo Domingo and Aparecida
were also significant events for the life of the Church as a whole. For
my part, having served as a missionary in Peru for many years, I am
greatly indebted to this process of ecclesial discernment, which
Pope Francis wisely linked to that of other particular Churches,
especially those in the global South. I would now like to take up two
specific themes of this episcopal teaching.

Structures of sin that create poverty and extreme inequality

90. At Medellín, the bishops declared themselves in favor of a
preferential option for the poor: “Christ our Savior not only loved the
poor, but, ‘being rich, he became poor.’ He lived a life of poverty,
focused his mission on preaching their liberation, and founded his
Church as a sign of this poverty in our midst… The poverty endured by
so many of our brothers and sisters cries out for justice, solidarity,
witness, commitment and efforts directed to ending it, so that the
saving mission entrusted by Christ may be fully accomplished.”
The bishops stated forcefully that the Church, to be fully
faithful to her vocation, must not only share the condition of the
poor, but also stand at their side and work actively for their integral
development. Faced with a situation of worsening poverty in Latin
America, the Puebla Conference confirmed the Medellín decision in favor
of a frank and prophetic option for the poor and described structures
of injustice as a “social sin.”

91. Charity has the power to change reality; it is a genuine force for
change in history. It is the source that must inspire and guide every
effort to “resolve the structural causes of poverty,” and to
do so with urgency. It is my hope that we will see more and more
“politicians capable of sincere and effective dialogue aimed at healing
the deepest roots — and not simply the appearances — of the evils in
our world.” For “it is a matter of hearing the cry of entire
peoples, the poorest peoples of the earth.” 

92. We must continue, then, to denounce the “dictatorship of an economy
that kills,” and to recognize that “while the earnings of a minority
are growing exponentially, so too is the gap separating the majority
from the prosperity enjoyed by those happy few. This imbalance is the
result of ideologies that defend the absolute autonomy of the
marketplace and financial speculation. Consequently, they reject the
right of states, charged with vigilance for the common good, to
exercise any form of control. A new tyranny is being born, invisible
and often virtual, which unilaterally and relentlessly imposes its own
laws and rules.” There is no shortage of theories attempting
to justify the present state of affairs or to explain that economic
thinking requires us to wait for invisible market forces to resolve
everything. Nevertheless, the dignity of every human person must be
respected today, not tomorrow, and the extreme poverty of all those to
whom this dignity is denied should constantly weigh upon our
consciences.

93. In his Encyclical Dilexit Nos, Pope Francis reminded us
that social sin consolidates a “structure of sin” within society, and
is frequently “part of a dominant mindset that considers normal or
reasonable what is merely selfishness and indifference. This then gives
rise to social alienation.” It then becomes normal to ignore
the poor and live as if they do not exist. It then likewise seems
reasonable to organize the economy in such a way that sacrifices are
demanded of the masses in order to serve the needs of the powerful.
Meanwhile, the poor are promised only a few “drops” that trickle down,
until the next global crisis brings things back to where they were. A
genuine form of alienation is present when we limit ourselves to
theoretical excuses instead of seeking to resolve the concrete problems
of those who suffer. Saint John Paul II had already observed that,
“a society is alienated if its forms of social organization, production
and consumption make it more difficult to offer the gift of self and to
establish solidarity between people.” 

94. We need to be increasingly committed to resolving the structural
causes of poverty. This is a pressing need that “cannot be delayed, not
only for the pragmatic reason of its urgency for the good order of
society, but because society needs to be cured of a sickness which is
weakening and frustrating it, and which can only lead to new crises.
Welfare projects, which meet certain urgent needs, should be considered
merely provisional responses.” I can only state once more
that inequality “is the root of social ills.” Indeed, “it
frequently becomes clear that, in practice, human rights are not equal
for all.” 

95. As it is, “the current model, with its emphasis on success and
self-reliance, does not appear to favor an investment in efforts to
help the slow, the weak or the less talented to find opportunities in
life.” The same questions keep coming back to us. Does this
mean that the less gifted are not human beings? Or that the weak do not
have the same dignity as ourselves? Are those born with fewer
opportunities of lesser value as human beings? Should they limit
themselves merely to surviving? The worth of our societies, and our own
future, depends on the answers we give to these questions. Either we
regain our moral and spiritual dignity or we fall into a cesspool.
Unless we stop and take this matter seriously, we will continue, openly
or surreptitiously, “to legitimize the present model of distribution,
where a minority believes that it has the right to consume in a way
which can never be universalized, since the planet could not even
contain the waste products of such consumption.” 

96. One structural issue that cannot realistically be resolved from
above and needs to be addressed as quickly as possible has to do with
the locations, neighborhoods, homes and cities where the poor live and
spend their time. All of us appreciate the beauty of “those cities
which overcome paralyzing mistrust, integrate those who are different
and make this very integration a new factor of development! How
attractive are those cities which, even in their architectural design,
are full of spaces which connect, relate and favor the recognition of
others!” Yet, at the same time, “we cannot fail to consider
the effects on people’s lives of environmental deterioration, current
models of development and the throwaway culture.” For “the
deterioration of the environment and of society affects the most
vulnerable people on the planet.” 

97. All the members of the People of God have a duty to make their
voices heard, albeit in different ways, in order to point out and
denounce such structural issues, even at the cost of appearing foolish
or naïve. Unjust structures need to be recognized and eradicated by the
force of good, by changing mindsets but also, with the help of science
and technology, by developing effective policies for societal change.
It must never be forgotten that the Gospel message has to do not only
with an individual’s personal relationship with the Lord, but also with
something greater: “the Kingdom of God (cf. Lk 4:43); it is about
loving God who reigns in our world. To the extent that he reigns within
us, the life of society will be a setting for universal fraternity,
justice, peace and dignity. Both Christian preaching and life, then,
are meant to have an impact on society. We are seeking God’s Kingdom.”

98. Finally, in a document that was not initially well received by
everyone, we find a reflection that remains timely today: “The
defenders of orthodoxy are sometimes accused of passivity, indulgence,
or culpable complicity regarding the intolerable situations of
injustice and the political regimes which prolong them. Spiritual
conversion, the intensity of the love of God and neighbor, zeal for
justice and peace, the Gospel meaning of the poor and of poverty, are
required of everyone, and especially of pastors and those in positions
of responsibility. The concern for the purity of the faith demands
giving the answer of effective witness in the service of one’s
neighbor, the poor and the oppressed in particular, in an integral
theological fashion.” 

The poor as subjects

99. The life of the universal Church was enriched by the discernment of
the Aparecida Conference, in which the Latin American bishops made
clear that the Church’s preferential option for the poor “is implicit
in the Christological faith in the God who became poor for us, so as to
enrich us with his poverty.” The Aparecida Document situates
the Church’s mission in the present context of a globalized world
marked by new and dramatic imbalances. In their Final
Message, the bishops wrote: “The stark differences between rich and
poor invite us to work with greater commitment to being disciples
capable of sharing the table of life, the table of all the sons and
daughters of the Father, a table that is open and inclusive, from which
no one is excluded. We therefore reaffirm our preferential and
evangelical option for the poor.” 

100. At the same time, the Document, taking up a theme treated in
earlier Conferences of the Latin American episcopate, insists on the
need to consider marginalized communities as subjects capable of
creating their own culture, rather than as objects of charity on the
part of others. This means that such communities have the right to
embrace the Gospel and to celebrate and communicate their faith in
accord with the values present within their own cultures. Their
experience of poverty gives them the ability to recognize aspects of
reality that others cannot see; for this reason, society needs to
listen to them. The same holds true for the Church, which should regard
positively their “popular” practice of the faith. A fine passage from
the Aparecida Document can help us reflect on this point and our proper
response: “Only the closeness that makes us friends enables us to
appreciate deeply the values of the poor today, their legitimate
desires, and their own manner of living the faith… Day by day, the poor
become agents of evangelization and of comprehensive human promotion:
they educate their children in the faith, engage in ongoing solidarity
among relatives and neighbors, constantly seek God, and give life to
the Church’s pilgrimage. In the light of the Gospel, we recognize their
immense dignity and their sacred worth in the eyes of Christ, who was
poor like them and excluded among them. Based on this experience of
faith, we will share with them the defense of their rights.” 

101. All this entails one aspect of the option for the poor that we
must constantly keep in mind, namely that it demands of us an attitude
of attentiveness to others. “This loving attentiveness is the beginning
of a true concern for their person which inspires me effectively to
seek their good. This entails appreciating the poor in their goodness,
in their experience of life, in their culture, and in their ways of
living the faith. True love is always contemplative, and permits us to
serve the other not out of necessity or vanity, but rather because he
or she is beautiful above and beyond mere appearances… Only on the
basis of this real and sincere closeness can we properly accompany the
poor on their path of liberation.” For this reason, I
express my heartfelt gratitude to all those who have chosen to live
among the poor, not merely to pay them an occasional visit but to live
with them as they do. Such a decision should be deemed one of the
highest forms of evangelical life.

102. In light of this, it is evident that all of us must “let ourselves
be evangelized” by the poor and acknowledge “the mysterious
wisdom which God wishes to share with us through them.” 
Growing up in precarious circumstances, learning to survive in the most
adverse conditions, trusting in God with the assurance that no one else
takes them seriously, and helping one another in the darkest moments,
the poor have learned many things that they keep hidden in their
hearts. Those of us who have not had similar experiences of living this
way certainly have much to gain from the source of wisdom that is the
experience of the poor. Only by relating our complaints to their
sufferings and privations can we experience a reproof that can
challenge us to simplify our lives.

CHAPTER FIVE
A CONSTANT CHALLENGE

103. I have chosen to recall the age-old history of the Church’s care
for the poor and with the poor in order to make clear that it has
always been a central part of her life. Indeed, caring for the poor is
part of the Church’s great Tradition, a beacon as it were of
evangelical light to illumine the hearts and guide the decisions of
Christians in every age. That is why we must feel bound to invite
everyone to share in the light and life born of recognizing Christ in
the faces of the suffering and those in need. Love for the poor is an
essential element of the history of God’s dealings with us; it rises up
from the heart of the Church as a constant appeal to the hearts of the
faithful, both individually and in our communities. As the Body of
Christ, the Church experiences the lives of the poor as her very
“flesh,” for theirs is a privileged place within the pilgrim people of
God. Consequently, love for the poor — whatever the form their poverty
may take — is the evangelical hallmark of a Church faithful to the
heart of God. Indeed, one of the priorities of every movement of
renewal within the Church has always been a preferential concern for
the poor. In this sense, her work with the poor differs in its
inspiration and method from the work carried out by any other
humanitarian organization.

104. No Christian can regard the poor simply as a societal problem;
they are part of our “family.” They are “one of us.” Nor can our
relationship to the poor be reduced to merely another ecclesial
activity or function. In the words of the Aparecida Document, “we are
asked to devote time to the poor, to give them loving attention, to
listen to them with interest, to stand by them in difficult moments,
choosing to spend hours, weeks or years of our lives with them, and
striving to transform their situations, starting from them. We cannot
forget that this is what Jesus himself proposed in his actions and by
his words.” 

The Good Samaritan, once again

105. The dominant culture at the beginning of this millennium would
have us abandon the poor to their fate and consider them unworthy of
attention, much less our respect. Pope Francis, in his Encyclical
Fratelli Tutti, challenged us to reflect on the parable of the
Good Samaritan (cf. Lk 10:25-37), which presents the different
reactions of those confronted by the sight of a wounded man lying on
the road. Only the Good Samaritan stops and cares for him. Pope
Francis went on to ask each of us: “Which of these persons do you
identify with? This question, blunt as it is, is direct and incisive.
Which of these characters do you resemble? We need to acknowledge that
we are constantly tempted to ignore others, especially the weak. Let us
admit that, for all the progress we have made, we are still
‘illiterate’ when it comes to accompanying, caring for and supporting
the most frail and vulnerable members of our developed societies. We
have become accustomed to looking the other way, passing by, and
ignoring situations until they affect us directly.” 

106. It is important for us to realize that the story of the Good
Samaritan remains timely even today. “If I encounter a person sleeping
outdoors on a cold night, I can view him or her as an annoyance, an
idler, an obstacle in my path, a troubling sight, a problem for
politicians to sort out, or even a piece of refuse cluttering a public
space. Or I can respond with faith and charity, and see in this person
a human being with a dignity identical to my own, a creature infinitely
loved by the Father, an image of God, a brother or sister redeemed by
Jesus Christ. That is what it is to be a Christian! Can holiness
somehow be understood apart from this lively recognition of the dignity
of each human being?” What did the Good Samaritan do?

107. These questions become all the more urgent in light of a serious
flaw present in the life of our societies, but also in our Christian
communities. The many forms of indifference we see all around us are in
fact “signs of an approach to life that is spreading in various and
subtle ways. What is more, caught up as we are with our own needs, the
sight of a person who is suffering disturbs us. It makes us uneasy,
since we have no time to waste on other people’s problems. These are
symptoms of an unhealthy society. A society that seeks prosperity but
turns its back on suffering. May we not sink to such depths! Let us
look to the example of the Good Samaritan.” The final words
of the Gospel parable — “Go and do likewise” ( Lk 10:37) — represent a
mandate that every Christian must daily take to heart.

An inescapable challenge for the Church today

108. At a particularly critical time in the history of the Church in
Rome, when the imperial institutions were collapsing under the pressure
of the barbarian invasions, Pope Saint Gregory the Great felt it
necessary to remind the faithful: “Every minute we can find a Lazarus
if we seek him, and every day, even without seeking, we find one at our
door. Now beggars besiege us, imploring alms; later they will be our
advocates... Therefore do not waste the opportunity of doing works of
mercy; do not store unused the good things you possess.” 
Gregory courageously denounced contemporary forms of prejudice against
the poor, including the belief that they were responsible for their
plight: “Whenever you see the poor doing something reprehensible, do
not despise or discredit them, for the fire of poverty is perhaps
purifying their sinful actions, however slight they be.” Not
infrequently, our prosperity can make us blind to the needs of others,
and even make us think that our happiness and fulfillment depend on
ourselves alone, apart from others. In such cases, the poor can act as
silent teachers for us, making us conscious of our presumption and
instilling within us a rightful spirit of humility.

109. While it is true that the rich care for the poor, the opposite is
no less true. This is a remarkable fact confirmed by the entire
Christian tradition. Lives can actually be turned around by the
realization that the poor have much to teach us about the Gospel and
its demands. By their silent witness, they make us confront the
precariousness of our existence. The elderly, for example, by their
physical frailty, remind us of our own fragility, even as we attempt to
conceal it behind our apparent prosperity and outward appearance. The
poor, too, remind us how baseless is the attitude of aggressive
arrogance with which we frequently confront life’s difficulties. They
remind us how uncertain and empty our seemingly safe and secure lives
may be. Here again, Saint Gregory the Great has much to tell us: “Let
no one consider himself secure, saying, ‘I do not steal from others,
but simply enjoy what is rightfully mine.’ The rich man was not
punished because he took what belonged to others, but because, while
possessing such great riches, he had become impoverished within. This
was indeed the reason for his condemnation to hell: in his prosperity,
he preserved no sense of justice; the wealth he had received made him
proud and caused him to lose all sense of compassion.” 

110. For us Christians, the problem of the poor leads to the very heart
of our faith. Saint John Paul II taught that the preferential
option for the poor, namely the Church’s love for the poor, “is
essential for her and a part of her constant tradition, and impels her
to give attention to a world in which poverty is threatening to assume
massive proportions in spite of technological and economic progress.”
For Christians, the poor are not a sociological category,
but the very “flesh” of Christ. It is not enough to profess the
doctrine of God’s Incarnation in general terms. To enter truly into
this great mystery, we need to understand clearly that the Lord took on
a flesh that hungers and thirsts, and experiences infirmity and
imprisonment. “A poor Church for the poor begins by reaching out to the
flesh of Christ. If we reach out to the flesh of Christ, we begin to
understand something, to understand what this poverty, the Lord’s
poverty, actually is; and this is far from easy.” 

111. By her very nature the Church is in solidarity with the poor, the
excluded, the marginalized and all those considered the outcast of
society. The poor are at the heart of the Church because “our faith in
Christ, who became poor, and was always close to the poor and the
outcast, is the basis of our concern for the integral development of
society’s most neglected members.” In our hearts, we
encounter “the need to heed this plea, born of the liberating action of
grace within each of us, and so it is not a matter of a mission
reserved only to a few.” a name="ftnref124" href="#ftn124" class="
cleaner">

112. At times, Christian movements or groups have arisen which show
little or no interest in the common good of society and, in particular,
the protection and advancement of its most vulnerable and disadvantaged
members. Yet we must never forget that religion, especially the
Christian religion, cannot be limited to the private sphere, as if
believers had no business making their voice heard with regard to
problems affecting civil society and issues of concern to its members.

113. Indeed, “any Church community, if it thinks it can comfortably go
its own way without creative concern and effective cooperation in
helping the poor to live with dignity and reaching out to everyone,
will also risk breaking down, however much it may talk about social
issues or criticize governments. It will easily drift into a spiritual
worldliness camouflaged by religious practices, unproductive meetings
and empty talk.” 

114. Nor is it a question merely of providing for welfare assistance
and working to ensure social justice. Christians should also be aware
of another form of inconsistency in the way they treat the poor. In
reality, “the worst discrimination which the poor suffer is the lack of
spiritual care… Our preferential option for the poor must mainly
translate into a privileged and preferential religious care.”
Yet, this spiritual attentiveness to the poor is called into
question, even among Christians, by certain prejudices arising from the
fact that we find it easier to turn a blind eye to the poor. There are
those who say: “Our task is to pray and teach sound doctrine.”
Separating this religious aspect from integral development, they even
say that it is the government’s job to care for them, or that it would
be better not to lift them out of their poverty but simply to teach
them to work. At times, pseudo-scientific data are invoked to support
the claim that a free market economy will automatically solve the
problem of poverty. Or even that we should opt for pastoral work with
the so-called elite, since, rather than wasting time on the poor, it
would be better to care for the rich, the influential and
professionals, so that with their help real solutions can be found and
the Church can feel protected. It is easy to perceive the worldliness
behind these positions, which would lead us to view reality through
superficial lenses, lacking any light from above, and to cultivate
relationships that bring us security and a position of privilege.

Almsgiving today

115. I would like to close by saying something about almsgiving, which
nowadays is not looked upon favorably even among believers. Not only is
it rarely practiced, but it is even at times disparaged. Let me state
once again that the most important way to help the disadvantaged is to
assist them in finding a good job, so that they can lead a more
dignified life by developing their abilities and contributing their
fair share. In this sense, “lack of work means far more than simply not
having a steady source of income. Work is also this, but it is much,
much more. By working we become a fuller person, our humanity
flourishes, young people become adults only by working. The
Church’s social doctrine has always seen human work as a participation
in God’s work of creation that continues every day, also thanks to the
hands, mind and heart of the workers.” On the other hand,
where this is not possible, we cannot risk abandoning others to the
fate of lacking the necessities for a dignified life. Consequently,
almsgiving remains, for the time being, a necessary means of contact,
encounter and empathy with those less fortunate.

116. Those inspired by true charity know full well that almsgiving does
not absolve the competent authorities of their responsibilities,
eliminate the duty of government institutions to care for the poor, or
detract from rightful efforts to ensure justice. Almsgiving at least
offers us a chance to halt before the poor, to look into their eyes, to
touch them and to share something of ourselves with them. In any event,
almsgiving, however modest, brings a touch of pietas into a society
otherwise marked by the frenetic pursuit of personal gain. In the words
of the Book of Proverbs: “Those who are generous are blessed, for they
share their bread with the poor” (22:9).

117. Both the Old and New Testaments contain veritable hymns in praise
of almsgiving: “Be patient with someone in humble circumstances, and do
not keep him waiting for your alms… Store up almsgiving in your
treasury, and it will rescue you from every disaster” (Sir 29:8,12).
Jesus himself adds: “Sell your possessions, and give alms. Make purses
for yourselves that do not wear out, an unfailing treasure in heaven,
where no thief comes near and no moth destroys” (Lk 12:33).

118. Saint John Chrysostom is known for saying: “Almsgiving is the wing
of prayer. If you do not provide your prayer with wings, it will hardly
fly.” In the same vein, Saint Gregory of Nazianzus concluded
one of his celebrated orations with these words: “If you think that I
have something to say, servants of Christ, his brethren and co-heirs,
let us visit Christ whenever we may; let us care for him, feed him,
clothe him, welcome him, honor him, not only at a meal, as some have
done, or by anointing him, as Mary did, or only by lending him a tomb,
like Joseph of Arimathea, or by arranging for his burial, like
Nicodemus, who loved Christ half-heartedly, or by giving him gold,
frankincense and myrrh, like the Magi before all these others. The Lord
of all asks for mercy, not sacrifice... Let us then show him mercy in
the persons of the poor and those who today are lying on the ground, so
that when we come to leave this world they may receive us into
everlasting dwelling places.” 

119. Our love and our deepest convictions need to be continually
cultivated, and we do so through our concrete actions. Remaining in the
realm of ideas and theories, while failing to give them expression
through frequent and practical acts of charity, will eventually cause
even our most cherished hopes and aspirations to weaken and fade away.
For this very reason, we Christians must not abandon almsgiving. It can
be done in different ways, and surely more effectively, but it must
continue to be done. It is always better at least to do something
rather than nothing. Whatever form it may take, almsgiving will touch
and soften our hardened hearts. It will not solve the problem of world
poverty, yet it must still be carried out, with intelligence, diligence
and social responsibility. For our part, we need to give alms as a way
of reaching out and touching the suffering flesh of the poor.

120. Christian love breaks down every barrier, brings close those who
were distant, unites strangers, and reconciles enemies. It spans chasms
that are humanly impossible to bridge, and it penetrates to the most
hidden crevices of society. By its very nature, Christian love is
prophetic: it works miracles and knows no limits. It makes what was
apparently impossible happen. Love is above all a way of looking at
life and a way of living it. A Church that sets no limits to love, that
knows no enemies to fight but only men and women to love, is the Church
that the world needs today.

121. Through your work, your efforts to change unjust social structures
or your simple, heartfelt gesture of closeness and support, the poor
will come to realize that Jesus’ words are addressed personally to each
of them: “I have loved you” (Rev 3:9).

Given in Rome, at Saint Peter’s, on 4 October, the Memorial of Saint
Francis of Assisi, in the year 2025, the first of my Pontificate.

LEO PP. XIV

Francis, Encyclical Letter Dilexit Nos (24 October 2024),
170: AAS 116 (2024), 1422.

Ibid ., 171: AAS 116 (2024), 1422-1423.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Gaudete et Exsultate (19
March 2018), 96: AAS 110 (2018), 1137.

Francis, Audience with Representatives of the
Communications Media (16 March 2013): AAS 105 (2013), 381.

J. Bergoglio - A. Skorka , Sobre el cielo y la tierra, Buenos
Aires 2013, 214.

Paul VI, Homily at the Mass for the Last Public Session
of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council (7 December 1965): AAS 58
(1966), 55-56.

Cf. Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 187: AAS 105 (2013), 1098.

Ibid., 212: AAS 105 (2013), 1108.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Fratelli Tutti (3 October
2020), 23: AAS 112 (2020), 977.

Ibid., 21: AAS 112 (2020), 976.

Council of the European Communities , Decision (85/8/EEC) on
Specific Community Action to Combat Poverty (19 December 1984), Art.
1(2): Official Journal of the European Communities, No. L 2/24.

Cf. John Paul II, Catechesis (27 October 1999):
L’Osservatore Romano, 28 October 1999, 4.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 197: AAS 105 (2013), 1102.

Cf. Francis, Message for the 5^th World Day of the Poor
(13 June 2021), 3: AAS 113 (2021), 691: “Jesus not only sides with the
poor; he also shares their lot. This is a powerful lesson for his
disciples in every age.”

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 186: AAS 105 (2013), 1098.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Gaudete et Exsultate (19
March 2018), 95: AAS 110 (2018), 1137.

Ibid ., 97: AAS 110 (2018), 1137.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 194: AAS 105 (2013), 1101.

Francis, Audience with Representatives of the
Communications Media (16 March 2013): AAS 105 (2013), 381.

Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, Dogmatic Constitution
Lumen Gentium, 8.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 48: AAS 105 (2013), 1040.

In this chapter, some of these witnesses are being put
forward. This is not being done in an exhaustive manner but rather to
demonstrate that care for the poor has always characterized the
presence of the Church in the world. A more in-depth reflection on the
attention given to those most in need can be found in the following
book: V. Paglia, Storia della povertà, Milan 2014.

Cf. Ambrose, De officiis ministrorum I, cap. 41, 205-206:
CCSL 15, Turnhout 2000, 76-77; II, cap. 28, 140-143: CCSL 15, 148-149.

Ibid., II, cap. 28, 140: CCSL 15, 148.

Ibid.

Ibid., II, cap. 28, 142: CCSL 15, 148.

Ignatius of Antioch, Epistula ad Smyrnaeos, 6, 2: SC 10bis,
Paris 2007, 136-138.

Polycarp, Epistula ad Philippenses, 6, 1: SC 10bis, 186.

Justin, Apologia prima, 67, 6-7: SC 507, Paris 2006, 310.

John Chrysostom, Homiliae in Matthaeum, 50, 3: PG 58, Paris
1862, 508.

Ibid. 50, 4: PG 58, 509.

John Chrysostom, Homilia in Epistula ad Hebraeos, 11, 3 : PG
63, Paris 1862, 94.

John Chrysostom, Homilia II De Lazaro, 6: PG 48, Paris 1862,
992.

Ambrose, De Nabuthae, 12, 53: CSEL 32/2,
Prague-Vienna-Leipzig 1897, 498.

Augustine, Enarrationes in Psalmos, 125, 12: CSEL 95/3,
Vienna 2001, 181.

Augustine, Sermo LXXXVI, 5: CCSL 41Ab, Turnhout 2019,
411-412.

Pseudo-Augustine, Sermo CCCLXXXVIII, 2: PL 39, Paris 1862,
1700.

Cyprian, De mortalitate, 16: CCSL 3A, Turnhout 1976, 25.

Francis, Message for the 30^th World Day of the Sick (10
December 2021), 3: AAS 114 (2022), 51.

Camillus de Lellis, Rule of the Order of Ministers of the
Sick, 27: M. Vanti (ed.), Scritti di San Camillo de Lellis, Milan 1965,
67.

Louise de Marillac, Letter to Sisters Claudia Carré and Maria
Gaudoin (28 November 1657): E. Charpy (ed.), Sainte Louise de Marillac.
Écrits, Paris 1983, 576.

Basil the Great, Regulae fusius tractatae, 37, 1: PG 31,
Paris 1857, 1009 C-D.

Regula Benedicti, 53, 15: SC 182, Paris 1972, 614.

John Cassian, Collationes, XIV, 10: CSEL 13, Vienna 2004,
410.

Benedict XVI, Catechesis (21 October 2009):
L’Osservatore Romano, 22 October 2009, 1.

Cf. Innocent III, Bull Operante divinae dispositionis –
Primitive Rule of the Trinitarians (17 December 1198), 2: J.L.
Aurrecoechea – A. Moldón (eds.), Fuentes históricas de la Orden
Trinitaria (s. XII-XV), Córdoba 2003, 6: “All things, from whatever
lawful source they may come, the brothers are to divide them into three
equal parts. Insofar as two parts will be sufficient, the works of
mercy are to be performed from them, as well as providing for a
moderate sustenance for themselves and their necessary household
members. The third part is to be reserved for the ransom of captives
who are incarcerated for the faith of Christ.”

Cf. Constitutions of the Mercedarian Order, n. 14: Orden de
la Bienaventurada Virgen María de la Merced, Regla y Constituciones,
Rome 2014, 53: “To fulfill this mission, driven by charity, we
consecrate ourselves to God with a special vow, called Redemption, by
virtue of which we promise to give our lives, if necessary, as Christ
gave his for us, to save Christians who are in extreme danger of losing
their faith in new forms of slavery.”

Cf. Saint John Baptist of the Conception, La regla de la
Orden de la Santísima Trinidad, XX, 1: BAC Maior 60, Madrid, 1999, 90:
“In this, the poor and prisoners are like Christ, on whom the
sufferings of the world are laid... This holy Order of the Most Holy
Trinity summons them and invites them to come and drink the water of
the Savior, which means that, if Christ hanging on the cross was
redemption and salvation for men, the Order has taken this redemption
and wants to distribute it to the poor and save and free the
prisoners.”

Cf. Saint John Baptist of the Conception, El recogimiento
interior, XL, 4: BAC Maior 48, Madrid 1995, 689: “Free will makes man
free and master among all creatures, but, God help me, how many are
those who, by this way, become slaves and prisoners of the devil,
imprisoned and chained by their passions and lusts.”

Francis, Message for the 48^th World Day of Peace (8
December 2014), 3: AAS 107 (2015), 69.

Francis, Meeting with Police Prison Officers, Detainees,
and Volunteers (Verona, May 18 May 2024): AAS 116 (2024), 766.

Honorius III, Bull Solet annuere – Regula bullata (29
November 1223), chap. VI: SC 285, Paris 1981, 192.

Cf. Gregory IX, Bull Sicut manifestum est (17 September
1228), 7: SC 325, Paris 1985, 200: “Sicut igitur supplicastis,
altissimae paupertatis propositum vestrum favore apostolico roboramus,
auctoritate vobis praesentium indulgentes, ut recipere possessiones a
nullo compelli possitis.”

Cf. S.C. Tugwell, (ed.), Early Dominicans. Selected Writings,
Mahwah 1982, 16-19.

Thomas of Celano, Vita Seconda, pars prima, cap. IV, 8:
AnalFranc, 10, Florence 1941, 135.

Francis, Address following the visit to the tomb of Don
Lorenzo Milani, (Barbiana, 20 June 2017), 2: AAS 109 (2017), 745.

John Paul II, Address to the Participants in the General
Chapter of the Poor Clerics Regular of the Mother of God of the Pious
Schools ( Piarists) (5 July 1997), 2: L’Osservatore Romano, 6 July
1997, 5.

Ibid.

John Paul II, Homily for the Mass of Canonization (18
April 1999): AAS 91 (1999), 930.

Cf. John Paul II, Letter Iuvenum Patris (31 January 1988), 9:
AAS 80 (1988), 976.

Cf. Francis, Address to the Participants in the General
Chapter of the Institute of Charity (Rosminians) (1 October 2018):
L’Osservatore Romano, 1-2 October 2018, 7.

Francis, Homily for the Mass of Canonization (9 October
2022): AAS 114 (2022), 1338.

John Paul II, Message to the Congregation of the
Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart (31 May 2000), 3: L’Osservatore
Romano, 16 July 2000, 5.

Cf. Pius XII, Papal Brief Superior Iam Aetate (8 September
1950): AAS 43 (1951), 455-456.

Francis, Message for the 105^th World Day of Migrants
and Refugees (27 May 2019): AAS 111 (2019), 911.

Francis, Message for the 100^th World Day of Migrants
and Refugees (5 August 2013): AAS 105 (2013), 930.

Teresa of Calcutta, Speech on the occasion of the awarding of
the Nobel Peace Prize (Oslo, 10 December 1979): Aimer jusqu’à en avoir
mal, Lyon 2017, 19-20.

John Paul II, Address to the Pilgrims who had come to
Rome for the Beatification of Mother Teresa (20 October 2003), 3:
L’Osservatore Romano, 20-21 October 2003, 10.

Francis, Homily for the Mass and Canonization (13
October 2019): AAS 111 (2019), 1712.

John Paul II, Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio Ineunte (6
January 2001), 49: AAS 93 (2001), 302.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Christus Vivit (25 March
2019), 231: AAS 111 (2019), 458.

Francis, Address to Participants in the World Meeting of
Popular Movements (28 October 2014): AAS 106 (2014), 851-852.

Ibid .: AAS 106 (2014), 859.

Francis, Address to Participants in the World Meeting of
Popular Movements (November 5, 2016): L’Osservatore Romano, 7-8
November, 2016, 5.

Ibid.

John XXIII, Radio Message to all the Christian faithful one
month before the opening of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council (11
September 1962): AAS 54 (1962), 682.

G. LERCARO, Intervention in the XXXV General Congregation of
the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council (6 December 1962), 2: AS I/IV,
327-328.

Ibid., 4: AS I/IV, 329.

Institute for Religious Sciences (ed.), Per la forza dello
Spirito. Discorsi conciliari del Card. Giacomo Lercaro, Bologna 1984,
115.

Paul VI, Address for the Solemn Inauguration of the Second
Session of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council (29 September 1963):
AAS 55 (1963) 857.

Paul VI, Catechesis (11 November 1964): Insegnamenti di Paolo
VI, II (1964), 984.

Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, Pastoral Constitution
Gaudium et Spes, 69, 71.

Paul VI, Encyclical Letter Populorum Progressio (26
March 1967), 23: AAS 59 (1967), 269.

Cf. ibid., 4: AAS 59 (1967), 259.

John Paul II, Encyclical Letter Sollicitudo Rei Socialis
(30 December 1987), 42: AAS 80 (1988), 572.

Ibid., AAS 80 (1988), 573.

John Paul II, Encyclical Letter Laborem Exercens (14
September 1981), 3: AAS 73 (1981), 584.

Benedict XVI, Encyclical Letter Caritas in Veritate (29
June 2009), 7: AAS 101 (2009), 645.

Ibid., 27: AAS 101 (2009), 661.

Second General Conference of the Latin American Bishops,
Medellín Document (24 October 1968), 14, n. 7: Celam, Medellín.
Conclusiones, Lima 2005, 131-132.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 202: AAS 105 (2013), 1105.

Ibid., 205: AAS 105 (2013), 1106.

Ibid., 190: AAS 105 (2013), 1099.

Ibid., 56: AAS 105 (2013), 1043.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Dilexit Nos (24 October
2024), 183: AAS 116 (2024), 1427.

John Paul II, Encyclical Letter Centesimus Annus (1 May
1991), 41: AAS 83 (1991), 844-845.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 202: AAS 105 (2013), 1105.

Ibid.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Fratelli Tutti (3 October
2020), 22: AAS 112 (2020), 976.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 209: AAS 105 (2013), 1107.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Laudato Si’ (24 May 2015),
50: AAS 107 (2015), 866.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 210: AAS 105 (2013), 1107.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Laudato Si’ (24 May 2015),
43: AAS 107 (2015), 863.

Ibid., 48: AAS 107 (2015), 865.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 180: AAS 105 (2013), 1095.

Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Instruction
on Certain Aspects of the “Theology of Liberation” (6 August 1984) XI,
18: AAS 76 (1984), 907-908.

Fifth General Conference of the Latin American and Caribbean
Bishops, Aparecida Document, (29 June 2007), n. 392, Bogotá 2007, pp.
179-180. Cf. Benedict XVI, Address at the Inaugural Session of the
Fifth General Conference of the Bishops of Latin America and the
Caribbean (13 May 2007), 3: AAS 99 (2007), 450.

Cf. Fifth General Conference of the Latin American and
Caribbean Bishops, Aparecida Document (29 June 2007), nn. 43-87, pp.
31-47.

Fifth General Conference of the Latin American and Caribbean
Bishops, Final Message (29 May 2007), n. 4, Bogotá 2007, p. 275.

Fifth General Conference of the Latin American and Caribbean
Bishops, Aparecida Document (29 June 2007), n. 398, p. 182.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 199: AAS 105 (2013), 1103-1104.

Ibid., 198: AAS 105 (2013), 1103.

Ibid.

Fifth General Conference of the Bishops of Latin America and
the Caribbean, Aparecida Document (29 June 2007), n. 397, p. 182.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Fratelli Tutti (3 October
2020), 64: AAS 112 (2020), 992.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Gaudete et Exsultate (19
March 2018), 98: AAS 110 (2018), 1137.

Francis, Encyclical Letter Fratelli Tutti (3 October
2020), 65-66: AAS 112 (2020), 992.

Gregory the Great, Homilia 40, 10: SC 522, Paris 2008,
552-554.

Ibid ., 6: SC 522, 546.

Ibid ., 3: SC 522, 536.

John Paul II, Encyclical Letter Centesimus Annus (1 May
1991), 57: AAS 83 (1991), 862-863.

Francis, Vigil of Pentecost with the Ecclesial Movements (18
May 2013): L’Osservatore Romano 20-21 May 2013, 5.

Francis, Apostolic Exhortation Evangelii Gaudium (24
November 2013), 186: AAS 105 (2013), 1098.

Ibid., 188: AAS 105 (2013), 1099.

Cf. ibid., 182-183: AAS 105 (2013), 1096-1097.

Ibid., 207: AAS 105 (2013), 1107.

Ibid., 200: AAS 105 (2013), 1104.

Francis, Address at the Meeting with Representatives of
the World of Labor at the Ilva Factory in Genoa (27 May 2017): AAS 109
(2017), 613.

Pseudo-Chrysostom, Homilia de Jejunio et Eleemosyna: PG 48,
1060.

Gregory Nazianzus, Oratio XIV, 40: PG 35, Paris 1886, 910.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

This item 12772 digitally provided courtesy of CatholicCulture.org
Mon13 October
Ordinary Time

Monday of the Twenty-Eighth Week in Ordinary Time

Image for Monday of the Twenty-Eighth Week in Ordinary Time

On this day in Fatima in 1917, the marvelous Miracle of the Sun took
place in the sky before 70,000 witnesses. The Roman Martyrology
commemorates St. Lubentius (d. 370), a spiritual…

Learn more about this day.
October Calendar ›
News, analysis & spirituality by email twice-weekly from
CatholicCulture.org.
First name:

Last name:

Sign up now!
Find us on Social Media.

Free eBook:

Free eBook: Liturgical Year 2024-2025, Vol. 6

Find us on Social Media.
About This Site | Terms and Conditions | Privacy |
User Conduct | Help/FAQ | Contact Us
Copyright © 2025 Trinity Communications. All rights reserved.

Quantcast

References

1. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772####
2. https://www.catholicculture.org/
3. https://www.catholicculture.org/
4. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
5. https://www.catholicculture.org/news/
6. https://www.catholicculture.org/news/most-important.cfm
7. https://www.catholicculture.org/news/topten.cfm
8. https://www.catholicculture.org/news/week.cfm
9. https://www.catholicculture.org/news/month.cfm
10. https://www.catholicculture.org/news/archives.cfm
11. https://www.catholicculture.org/about/catholicworldnews/
12. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
13. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/
14. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/reviews.cfm
15. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/topten.cfm
16. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/toptenbyauthor.cfm
17. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/archives.cfm
18. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
19. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/calendar/day.cfm
20. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/category/liturgical-year/
21. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/calendar/month.cfm?y=2025&m=10
22. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12529
23. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?id=12022
24. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/prayers/
25. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/activities/
26. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/recipes/
27. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
28. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/resources/
29. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/
30. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/whatyouneedto_know/
31. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/dictionary
32. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/catechism/
33. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/fathers/
34. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/most/
35. https://www.catholicculture.org/ebooks/
36. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
37. https://www.catholicculture.org/podcast/index.cfm
38. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/category/catholic-culture-podcast/
39. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/category/audiobooks
40. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/category/way-fathers/
41. https://www.catholicculture.org/commentary/category/criteria/
42. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
43. https://www.catholicculture.org/connect/
44. https://www.catholicculture.org/socialmedia/
45. https://www.catholicculture.org/newsletters/
46. https://www.catholicculture.org/promotions/tour/
47. https://www.catholicculture.org/feeds/
48. https://www.catholicculture.org/contact/
49. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
50. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772##
51. https://www.catholicculture.org//culture/resources/
52. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/
53. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/whatyouneedto_know/
54. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/dictionary
55. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/catechism/
56. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/fathers/
57. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/most/
58. https://www.catholicculture.org/ebooks/
59. https://www.catholicculture.org/users/donate.cfm?promoid=26
60. https://www.catholicculture.org/search/resultslist.cfm?requesttype=docbrowseauth&resourcetype=1&catlabel=author&catid=2673
61. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
62. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/20241024-enciclica-dilexit-nos.html
63. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn1
64. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn2
65. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/20241024-enciclica-dilexit-nos.html
66. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
67. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn3
68. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
69. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn4
70. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/06/29/saint-paul--apostle-of-the-city-of-rome.html
71. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/10/04/st--francis-of-assisi--founder-of-the-franciscan--order--patron-.html
72. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/10/04/st--francis-of-assisi--founder-of-the-franciscan--order--patron-.html
73. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/10/04/st--francis-of-assisi--founder-of-the-franciscan--order--patron-.html
74. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn5
75. https://www.vatican.va/archive/histcouncils/iivaticancouncil/index.htm
76. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
77. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn6
78. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn7
79. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn8
80. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn9
81. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn10
82. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn11
83. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn12
84. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn13
85. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn14
86. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/06/29/saint-paul--apostle-of-the-city-of-rome.html
87. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn15
88. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn16
89. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn17
90. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn18
91. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn19
92. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn20
93. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn21
94. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn22
95. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/06/29/saint-paul--apostle-of-the-city-of-rome.html
96. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/08/10/st--lawrence-deacon--and-martyr.html
97. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn23
98. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/12/07/st--ambrose--bishop-of-milan-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
99. https://www.vatican.va/content/vatican/en/holy-father/sisto-ii.html
100. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn24
101. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/12/07/st--ambrose--bishop-of-milan-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
102. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn25
103. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn26
104. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/10/17/st--ignatius-of-antioch--bishop--martyr-in-rome.html
105. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn27
106. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn28
107. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/06/01/st--justin--philosopher-and-martyr.html
108. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn29
109. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/09/13/st--john-chrysostom--bishop-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
110. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn30
111. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn31
112. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn32
113. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn33
114. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/08/28/st---augustine--bishop-of-hyppo-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
115. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/12/07/st--ambrose--bishop-of-milan-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
116. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn34
117. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/08/28/st---augustine--bishop-of-hyppo-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
118. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn35
119. https://www.vaticannews.va/en/saints/08/28/st---augustine--bishop-of-hyppo-and-doctor-of-the-church.html
120. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn36
121. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn37
122. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn38
123. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn39
124. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn40
125. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn41
126. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn42
127. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn43
128. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn44
129. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn45
130. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn46
131. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn47
132. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn48
133. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn49
134. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn50
135. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
136. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn51
137. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn52
138. https://www.vatican.va/content/gregorius-ix/en.html
139. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn53
140. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn54
141. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn55
142. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
143. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn56
144. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn57
145. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn58
146. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn59
147. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn60
148. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn61
149. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn62
150. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn63
151. https://www.vatican.va/content/vatican/en/holy-father/pio-xii.html
152. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn64
153. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
154. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn65
155. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn66
156. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn67
157. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
158. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn68
159. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
160. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn69
161. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
162. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn70
163. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn71
164. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn72
165. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn73
166. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn74
167. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn75
168. https://www.vatican.va/romancuria/pontificalcouncils/justpeace/documents/rcpc_justpeace_doc_20060526_compendio-dott-soc_en.html
169. https://www.vatican.va/content/leo-xiii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfl-xiiienc15051891_rerum-novarum.html
170. https://www.vatican.va/content/leo-xiii/en.html
171. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-xxiii/en.html
172. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-xxiii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfj-xxiiienc15051961_mater.html
173. https://www.vatican.va/archive/histcouncils/iivaticancouncil/index.htm
174. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-xxiii/en.html
175. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn76
176. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-xxiii/en.html
177. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn77
178. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn78
179. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn79
180. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
181. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn80
182. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn81
183. https://www.vatican.va/archive/histcouncils/iivaticancouncil/documents/vat-ii_const_19651207_gaudium-et-spes_en.html
184. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn82
185. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
186. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en/encyclicals/documents/hfp-vienc26031967_populorum.html
187. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn83
188. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en.html
189. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn84
190. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
191. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn85
192. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfjp-iienc30121987_sollicitudo-rei-socialis.html
193. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn86
194. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
195. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfjp-iienc14091981_laborem-exercens.html
196. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn87
197. https://www.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en.html
198. https://www.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en/encyclicals/documents/hfben-xvienc20090629_caritas-in-veritate.html
199. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn88
200. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn89
201. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
202. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
203. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn90
204. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn91
205. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn92
206. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn93
207. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn94
208. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/20241024-enciclica-dilexit-nos.html
209. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
210. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn95
211. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
212. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn96
213. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn97
214. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn98
215. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn99
216. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn100
217. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn101
218. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn102
219. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn103
220. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn104
221. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn105
222. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn106
223. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn107
224. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn108
225. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn109
226. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn110
227. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn111
228. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn112
229. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn113
230. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn114
231. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
232. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20201003enciclica-fratelli-tutti.html
233. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en.html
234. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn115
235. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn116
236. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn117
237. https://www.vatican.va/content/vatican/en/holy-father/gregorio-i--magno.html
238. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn118
239. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn119
240. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn120
241. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en.html
242. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn121
243. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn122
244. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn123
245. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn125
246. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn126
247. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn127
248. https://www.vatican.va/romancuria/pontificalcouncils/justpeace/documents/rcpc_justpeace_doc_20060526_compendio-dott-soc_en.html
249. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn128
250. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn129
251. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftn130
252. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref1
253. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/20241024-enciclica-dilexit-nos.html
254. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref2
255. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref3
256. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20180319_gaudete-et-exsultate.html
257. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref4
258. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2013/march/documents/papa-francesco20130316rappresentanti-media.html
259. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref5
260. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref6
261. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en/speeches/1965/documents/hfp-vispe19651207_epilogo-concilio.html
262. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref7
263. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
264. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref8
265. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
266. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref9
267. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20201003enciclica-fratelli-tutti.html
268. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref10
269. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20201003enciclica-fratelli-tutti.html
270. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref11
271. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref12
272. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/audiences/1999/documents/hfjp-iiaud27101999.html
273. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref13
274. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
275. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref14
276. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/messages/poveri/documents/20210613-messaggio-v-giornatamondiale-poveri-2021.html
277. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref15
278. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
279. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref16
280. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20180319_gaudete-et-exsultate.html
281. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref17
282. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref18
283. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
284. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref19
285. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2013/march/documents/papa-francesco20130316rappresentanti-media.html
286. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref20
287. https://www.vatican.va/archive/histcouncils/iivaticancouncil/documents/vat-ii_const_19641121_lumen-gentium_en.html
288. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref21
289. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
290. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref22
291. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref23
292. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref24
293. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref25
294. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref26
295. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref27
296. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref28
297. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref29
298. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref30
299. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref31
300. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref32
301. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref33
302. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref34
303. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref35
304. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref36
305. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref37
306. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref38
307. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref39
308. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref40
309. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref41
310. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref42
311. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref43
312. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref44
313. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref45
314. https://www.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en/audiences/2009/documents/hfben-xviaud20091021.html
315. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref46
316. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref47
317. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref48
318. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref49
319. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref50
320. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/messages/peace/documents/papa-francesco20141208messaggio-xlviii-giornata-mondiale-pace-2015.html
321. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref51
322. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2024/may/documents/20240518-verona-casa-circondariale.html
323. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref52
324. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref53
325. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref54
326. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref55
327. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref56
328. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref57
329. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/speeches/1997/july/documents/hfjp-iispe19970705_calasanz.html
330. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref58
331. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref59
332. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/homilies/1999/documents/hfjp-iihom18041999.html
333. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref60
334. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref61
335. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2018/october/documents/papa-francesco20181001rosminiani.html
336. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref62
337. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/homilies/2022/documents/20221009-omelia-canonizzazione.html
338. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref63
339. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/speeches/2000/jul-sep/documents/hfjp-iispe20000715_miss-sacro-cuore.html
340. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref64
341. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref65
342. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/messages/migration/documents/papa-francesco20190527world-migrants-day-2019.html
343. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref66
344. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/messages/migration/documents/papa-francesco20130805world-migrants-day.html
345. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref67
346. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref68
347. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/speeches/2003/october/documents/hfjp-iispe20031020_pilgrims-mother-teresa.html
348. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref69
349. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/homilies/2019/documents/papa-francesco20191013omelia-canonizzazione.html
350. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref70
351. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/it/apostletters/2001/documents/hfjp-iiapl_20010106_novo-millennio-ineunte.html
352. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref71
353. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref72
354. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2014/october/documents/papa-francesco20141028incontro-mondiale-movimenti-popolari.html
355. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref73
356. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref74
357. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2016/november/documents/papa-francesco20161105movimenti-popolari.html
358. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref75
359. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2016/november/documents/papa-francesco20161105movimenti-popolari.html
360. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref76
361. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref77
362. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref78
363. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref79
364. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref80
365. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref81
366. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref82
367. https://www.vatican.va/archive/histcouncils/iivaticancouncil/documents/vat-ii_const_19651207_gaudium-et-spes_en.html
368. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref83
369. https://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/en/encyclicals/documents/hfp-vienc26031967_populorum.html
370. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref84
371. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref85
372. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfjp-iienc30121987_sollicitudo-rei-socialis.html
373. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref86
374. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref87
375. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfjp-iienc14091981_laborem-exercens.html
376. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref88
377. https://www.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en/encyclicals/documents/hfben-xvienc20090629_caritas-in-veritate.html
378. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref89
379. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref90
380. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref91
381. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
382. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref92
383. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref93
384. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref94
385. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref95
386. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/20241024-enciclica-dilexit-nos.html
387. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref96
388. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfjp-iienc01051991_centesimus-annus.html
389. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref97
390. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
391. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref98
392. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref99
393. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20201003enciclica-fratelli-tutti.html
394. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref100
395. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
396. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref101
397. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20150524enciclica-laudato-si.html
398. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref102
399. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
400. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref103
401. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20150524enciclica-laudato-si.html
402. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref104
403. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref105
404. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
405. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref106
406. https://www.vatican.va/romancuria/congregations/cfaith/documents/rcconcfaith_doc_19840806_theology-liberation_en.html
407. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref107
408. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref108
409. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref109
410. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref110
411. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref111
412. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
413. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref112
414. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
415. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref113
416. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
417. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref114
418. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref115
419. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20201003enciclica-fratelli-tutti.html
420. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref116
421. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20180319_gaudete-et-exsultate.html
422. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref117
423. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/encyclicals/documents/papa-francesco20201003enciclica-fratelli-tutti.html
424. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref118
425. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref119
426. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref120
427. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref121
428. https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hfjp-iienc01051991_centesimus-annus.html
429. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref122
430. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref123
431. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
432. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref124
433. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
434. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref125
435. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
436. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref126
437. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
438. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref127
439. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/apostexhortations/documents/papa-francescoesortazione-ap20131124_evangelii-gaudium.html
440. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref128
441. https://www.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/speeches/2017/may/documents/papa-francesco20170527lavoratori-genova.html
442. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref129
443. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/view.cfm?recnum=12772#ftnref130
444. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/calendar/day.cfm?date=2025-10-13
445. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/calendar/day.cfm?date=2025-10-13
446. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/calendar/day.cfm?date=2025-10-13
447. https://www.catholicculture.org/culture/liturgicalyear/calendar/month.cfm?y=2025&m=10
448. https://www.catholicculture.org/socialmedia/
449. https://www.catholicculture.org/ebooks/viewebook.cfm?id=131
450. https://www.catholicculture.org/ebooks/viewebook.cfm?id=131
451. https://fineartamerica.com/art/christopher+pelicano
452. https://fineartamerica.com/art/christopher+pelicano
453. https://pflawler.substack.com/
454. https://www.catholicculture.org/socialmedia/
455. https://www.catholicculture.org/about/
456. https://www.catholicculture.org/about/legal/terms.cfm
457. https://www.catholicculture.org/about/legal/privacy.cfm
458. https://www.catholicculture.org/about/legal/conduct.cfm
459. https://www.catholicculture.org/help/
460. https://www.catholicculture.org/contact/
461. https://www.catholicculture.org/about/trinity
