**The “Me Too” Papacy (It’s not what you think)**

By Fr. Jerry Pokorsky | Oct 27, 2025

*“For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and the one who
humbles himself will be exalted.” (Lk. 18:14)*

We sometimes imagine the Pharisees as priests—the “religious
professionals” of their day. But in truth, they were laymen: men of
influence, piety, and public standing. Jesus’ rebuke was a warning to
all who are tempted to turn holiness into self-importance. And none of
us—priest or layman—escapes that temptation for long.

Among the Apostles, ambition reared its head. James and John, the sons
of Zebedee, boldly asked Jesus for the seats of honor in His glory.
They wanted front-row thrones beside the Messiah. Jesus gently but
firmly corrected them: “Whoever wishes to be great among you will be
your servant… for the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve.”
(Mk 10:43–45) Even the original Gospel band of brothers tried to climb
the ecclesiastical ladder.

Now, I’ll share a clerical secret. Me too. During the last conclave, I
placed my hat into the ring for the papacy. I promised I’d be a
laid-back Holy Father: sleep in, pray, celebrate Mass, sip cappuccino
over St. Peter’s Square. I had precedent: Pope Leo XII, on the eve of
the Protestant Rebellion, said, “God has given us the papacy. Let us
enjoy it.” My plan, though, was to keep my head down, enjoy life, and
mainly out of sight, hoping to prevent rebellion. For my papal name:
Pope Edgar Allan Pokorsky.

I’d delegate, so I’d have time for afternoon naps. Consultants like
Booze, Allan, and Hamilton would fix the Vatican Bank. Cardinal Burke
would tackle the Curia, Cardinal Müller would oversee the doctrinally
rambunctious German hierarchy, and AI would review church documents—AI
likely abides by Sacred Tradition better than many prelates.

But I wouldn’t write too many new encyclicals. Instead, I’d reissue the
great ones—Veritatis Splendor, Humanae Vitae, Familiaris Consortio—each
with a simple papal addendum on the cover page: “Me Too.” My own
encyclicals and apostolic exhortations would be the shortest in the
history of the Church. My pontificate would be known as The “Me Too”
Papacy: a papacy of solidarity with truth already spoken, holiness
already lived, and saints already canonized.

Veritatis Splendor? Me too.

Humanae Vitae? Me too.

The humility of Jesus? Me too, Lord—except make me pope first. Of
course, I wasn’t chosen—another man, a fine American Augustinian, was.
My ambitions were rightly checked. Yet my dreams reveal how the urge
for self-importance can easily seep in; clergy aren’t immune to wanting
to be first.

A Lesson from History

There’s a story—too good not to be true—about the conclave of 1914.
Cardinal Merry del Val, the powerful Secretary of State under Pope Pius
X, had once advised against promoting Archbishop Giacomo della Chiesa.
When Pius died, del Val was favored to succeed him. But instead, the
cardinals elected Archbishop della Chiesa as Pope Benedict XV.

When the defeated del Val came forward to pay homage, the new pope
quoted Psalm 118: “The stone which the builders rejected has become the
cornerstone.” Gracious in defeat, del Val replied: “By the Lord has
this been done, and it is marvelous in our eyes.”

In the years that followed, del Val popularized the Litany of
Humility—a prayer that asks for deliverance from the desire for esteem,
praise, and preference, and from the fear of being despised or
ridiculed. The prayer has us behold our deepest spiritual fears, like
the Israelites in the desert gazing upon the serpent on the staff of
Moses. It’s a dangerous prayer, because God answers it swiftly.

Interestingly, del Val didn’t actually write it. The Litany had been
composed anonymously by another priest decades earlier—a hidden soul
who sought no credit, and whose name history has lost. That anonymity
was the prayer’s first answer.

“Please, God—Me Too.”

Holiness is rarely spectacular. Most saints never make the calendar;
most humility is hidden in silence and service. But the Kingdom of
Heaven is built on those quiet “me too’s”—souls who echo Mary’s fiat,
who repeat Christ’s surrender in Gethsemane, who consent daily to be
forgotten for love of God.

In a world obsessed with recognition, our call is not to be first, or
famous, or followed—but to be faithful.::

    The Litany of Humility

    O Jesus, meek and humble of heart,
    Hear me.
    From the desire of being esteemed,
    Deliver me, O Jesus.
    From the desire of being loved,
    Deliver me, O Jesus.
    From the desire of being extolled, etc.
    From the desire of being honored,
    From the desire of being praised,
    From the desire of being preferred to others,
    From the desire of being consulted,
    From the desire of being approved,
    From the fear of being humiliated,
    From the fear of being despised,
    From the fear of suffering rebukes,
    From the fear of being calumniated,
    From the fear of being forgotten,
    From the fear of being ridiculed,
    From the fear of being wronged,
    From the fear of being suspected,
    That others may be loved more than I,
    Jesus, grant me the grace to desire it.
    That others may be esteemed more than I,
    Jesus, grant me the grace to desire it.
    That, in the opinion of the world, others may increase and I may
    decrease, etc.
    That others may be chosen and I set aside,
    That others may be praised and I go unnoticed,
    That others may be preferred to me in everything,
    That others may become holier than I,
    provided that I may become as holy as I should.

To every hidden saint, every unknown servant, every quiet soul who
humbly prays this litany—we say with gratitude, longing, and some
trepidation: Please, God: Me too.

*Fr. Jerry Pokorsky is a priest of the Diocese of Arlington who has also
served as a financial administrator in the Diocese of Lincoln. Trained
in business and accounting, he also holds a Master of Divinity and a
Master’s in moral theology. Father Pokorsky co-founded both CREDO and
Adoremus, two organizations deeply engaged in authentic liturgical
renewal. He writes regularly for a number of Catholic websites and
magazines. See full bio.*
