**What’s missing from Dilexi Te?**

By Phil Lawler Oct 16, 2025

*Just a week after its publication, Dilexi Te has almost disappeared
from public discussions. Is the first major teaching document of Pope
Leo XIV really destined to be so soon forgotten?*

The release of this papal document had been anxiously awaited, as
Vatican-watchers anticipated the first clear indications of the new
Pope’s pastoral plans. After years of controversy and confusion under
Pope Francis, would Leo steer the Barque of Peter back into calmer
waters, into the mainstream of Catholic thought? Or would he push ahead
with his predecessor’s program? The first few months of Leo’s
pontificate had not provided answers to those questions; he had
carefully avoided major controversies, while making sympathetic
gestures toward Catholics on both sides of various ecclesial disputes.
But an apostolic exhortation—especially one on a document as fraught
with political overtones as poverty—seemed sure to resolve the
mysteries.

It did not. Dilexi Te provided no fireworks, no theological novelties,
no promises of ambitious new papal initiatives. The first reports in
the American secular media, predictably enough, emphasized the points
on which the Pope’s thoughts conflicted with White House rhetoric. Just
as predictably, some Catholic commentators rushed to interpret the
document as either a definitive break with, or (more frequently) a
wholesale embrace of, the thinking of the late Pope Francis. But all of
those interpretations were strained. In fact it almost seemed an
over-reaction when some commentators accused others of over-reacting.
Dilexi Te is not a political statement, nor even primarily a doctrinal
one. Pope Leo changed his predecessor’s plan, turning what Pope Francis
had originally conceived as an encyclical, a teaching document, into an
apostolic exhortation, a pastoral document of somewhat less magisterial
weight that is, as the term suggests, an exhortation to the faithful.
The essential message of the document should be familiar and
unobjectionable to any Christian: the moral obligation to care for the
poor.

Dilexi Te has a challenging message, if it is read—as it was
intended—as a challenge to the Christian conscience. But it is not the
sort of papal pronouncement that sparks intramural battles within the
Church. In fact what is most remarkable about this apostolic
exhortation is what it does not say. But to appreciate what is missing,
one must have some appreciation for the tradition of Catholic social
teaching—an appreciation that is rarely found in the secular media.

The Francis Effect

Since his election, Pope Leo has rarely missed an opportunity to pay
homage to Pope Francis. In a real sense Dilexi Te is part of that
homage; the new Pontiff took up the project that the former Pontiff had
begun, reworked the draft, and made it his own. Some critics of Pope
Francis may regret that decision, hoping that the Catholic world can
shake off the influence of the contentious Argentine Pontiff as quickly
as possible. And it is true that soon enough, Pope Leo will be forced
to recognize the divisions created by his predecessor, and the
consequent erosion of papal authority. But it is another over-reaction
to suggest that by finishing his predecessor’s draft, Leo proved
himself a loyal disciple of the Francis approach. After all, Pope
Francis picked up an unfinished draft by his immediate predecessor,
Benedict XVI, to produce his first encyclical, Lumen Fidei. And today
no one suggests that Francis was a clone of Benedict.

As with Lumen Fidei, so too with Dilexi Te, a careful reader can often
discern which passages were written by the deceased Pope. A reference
to “the dictatorship of an economy that kills” seems likely to have
come from Francis, as do the hyperbolic claims that some ideologies
“dismiss or ridicule charitable works,” and reject the right of states
to “exercise any form of control” over the free market. There may be a
few people who take such extreme views, but their influence is felt
mostly in Hollywood movies, not in government policies, and such
overheated rhetoric detracts from the gravity of a papal exhortation.

Still Dilexi Te does not call for any sort of sweeping political
reforms. It is a reform of the heart that Pope Leo wants: a more urgent
commitment, on the part of individuals and institutions, to the work of
charity. Most of the apostolic exhortation is devoted to pounding home
the message—consistent all through the Bible and the history of the
Church—that the faithful must care for their neighbors in need. On the
few occasions when the document offers specific practical suggestions,
they are utterly unexceptionable (and, significantly, seem to bear the
style of Pope Leo): as with the call to almsgiving—preferably on an
individual basis—and the observation that “the most important way to
help the disadvantaged is to assist them in finding a good job.”

Discordant Notes

There are, to be sure, passages in the document that will grate on the
raw sensibilities of faithful Catholics who have felt the lash of
Vatican rhetoric over the course of the past decade. Particularly on
the issue of immigration—which American secular reporters quickly chose
for their headline stories, Dilexi Te misses some crucial distinctions.

Yes, both the Old Testament and the New warn believers that they, and
the societies in which they live, will be judged on their treatment of
strangers in need. But this apostolic exhortation, like so many recent
Vatican pronouncements, makes short shrift of a society’s legitimate
right to protect its own culture and enforce its own laws. In Europe
especially, the pattern of immigration today can be seen not merely the
movement of helpless people seeking refuge, but as an Islamic bid to
take over once-Christian societies that have lost the will to protect
their own cultural heritage. Surely the Catholic Church should have
something to say about the religious dimension of that rising conflict.

Similarly, in its laudatory treatment of “popular movements,” Dilexi Te
appears to embrace only movements associated with the political Left.
Isn’t the American pro-life movement a perfect example of a “popular
movement” that deserves Church support? And the French Manif pour tous?

More importantly, Dilexi Te risks losing the essential focus of
Catholic pastoral work when it refers to “structures of sin” in the
global economy. Structures do not sin; men and women do. And the global
economy will not go to heaven or hell. The work of the Church is
bringing the means of salvation to individual souls, not reforming the
structures of society.

Oh, those structures of society do need to be reformed. But they will
be reformed if and only if the people involved have reformed their own
lives—if and only if good people make the decisions that will tone down
the excesses of materialism and consumerism, and help us all to
recognize that just as there are many forms of poverty, spiritual and
moral and cultural, so there are many forms of wealth which our
secularized society fails to recognize. In his appraisal of Dilexi
Te, Anthony Esolen made the important observation that “much of the
harm of poverty among us can be alleviated by a general embrace of
poverty, or at least a distaste for wealth, flash, power, glory, and
the ceaseless noise of the licentious.”

The Catholic Critique

It would be tragic, however, if politically conservative Catholics let
their discontent with these aspects of the papal document distract them
from its central message. No believing Christian should reject the
commandment of charity, of course. But more than that; no faithful
Catholic should defend the excesses of the global world order today. We
have seen, in recent years, an unprecedented transfer of wealth from
the working classes to the wealthy, an obscene concentration of wealth
and power in the hands of a privileged elite. Maybe the Pope is wrong
to focus on economic inequality, but who can justify the corporate
culture in which chief executives earn spectacular salaries while their
workers are laid off and their stockholders see their share prices
fall?

In the US, the most interesting critique of this rising inequality, in
fact, has come not from the political Left but from the conservative
Charles Murray, in his important book Coming Apart. We are indeed a
society that is “coming apart” at the seams—not because of economic
inequality by itself, but because of the loss of the moral
underpinnings that are essential to the proper functions of a healthy
market economy. A free market is based on the individual’s freedom to
choose, and if individuals lose the habit of choosing wisely the
results are devastating. Thus our culture has come to tolerate, then
actively to promote, moral evils. Our culture has seen the devastating
breakdown of families and the alienation of whole socio-economic blocs.
This is a society in desperate need of reform.

And for a full century now, the tradition of Catholic social teaching
has offered a template for that reform. Starting with Pope Leo XIII
(whose name the current Pontiff took for his own, surely a significant
choice), magisterial teaching has criticized both socialism and
capitalism. True, papal teaching has condemned socialism outright. And
perhaps it is also true that papal encyclicals have (until Centesimus
Annus) been slow to recognize the enormous benefits that a market
economy has brought to the world and especially to the poor. But
throughout the century, Pontiffs have consistently stressed that a
free-market economy must be moored to moral principle.

So the most important contribution that the Church can make to the
discussion of economic problems is a reaffirmation of the fundamental
tenets of Catholic social teaching, which in turn are derived from
fundamental tenets of Catholic doctrine. Begin, for instance, with the
vital importance of the family, the foundational building-block of a
healthy social and economic order. In any discussion of poverty, the
most practical advice that we can give to young people is to “get
married and stay married”—a message perfectly congruent with Catholic
teaching, but unfortunately missing from Dilexi Te. To underline that
message, we might even resurrect the calls from earlier Pontiffs for a
“living wage,” to ensure that a working man can support his family and
allow his wife to dedicate herself to the more important work of
forming their children.

The topic of subsidiarity, another keystone of Catholic social
teaching, is also not to be found in Dilexi Te. But Pope Leo does, in
his closing section on almsgiving, lay heavy stress on the ways in
which individual contact with the poor can change the lives of both the
donors and the recipients, providing spiritual benefits that
bureaucratic government programs cannot possibly match:

Almsgiving at least offers us a chance to halt before the poor, to
look into their eyes, to touch them and to share something of
ourselves with them. In any event, almsgiving, however modest,
brings a touch of pietas into a society otherwise marked by the
frenetic pursuit of personal gain. In the words of the Book of
Proverbs: “Those who are generous are blessed, for they share their
bread with the poor.”

That insight—which, unless I am much mistaken, is distinctively the
contribution of Pope Leo—drives home the central message of Dilexi Te.
Charitable work, while it eases the material needs of the poor, can do
a much greater service by easing the spiritual poverty of the rich.

*Phil Lawler has been a Catholic journalist for more than 30 years. He
has edited several Catholic magazines and written eight books. Founder
of Catholic World News, he is the news director and lead analyst at
CatholicCulture.org.*
