**Did I Marry Hagar the Horrible?**

*By Fr. Jerry Pokorsky on Oct 13, 2025*

In the old newspaper cartoon, Hagar the Horrible sits at the dinner
table, gobbling a huge turkey drumstick. Across the table, Helga, his
Viking wife, watches with a look of complete disgust, eyes rolling at
her husband’s barbaric table manners. She sighs and says, “Isn’t that
disgusting?” Without missing a bite, Hagar cheerfully answers, mouth
half-full, “Yes, but the mashed potatoes are great.” Alas, the scene
resonates all too easily with many households. Our everyday habitual
courtesies—including table manners—undergird Christian morality.

Hagar and his wife were probably not Catholic. Even so, if they were,
they might have chosen the same Scripture passage that, as history
demonstrates, every single couple selects for their wedding Mass since
the death of the last Apostle (look it up). We’ve all heard Saint
Paul’s litany of love (1 Cor. 13): “Love is patient and kind; love is
not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude. Love does not
insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful….” Our hearts
melt when we hear these words and pray that the love of our life
responds in kind to our love.

St. Paul’s description of love prompts us to look outward, offering
ourselves to God and others instead of succumbing to self-seeking
narcissism. Living by this divine love heals and transforms the soul,
restores the peace disrupted by sin, and draws us closer to the example
of Jesus—moving us further away from the likes of Hagar the Horrible.
Rejecting his love leads us away from God.

In the Gospel, Jesus cures ten lepers. This disease not only disfigures
and robs its victim of sensation and mobility, but also brings
emotional suffering: isolation, shame, and rejection. Throughout
history, leprosy’s social stigma and exclusion have resulted in a
profound sense of loneliness and despair.

Leprosy is a metaphor for sin and its effects. The virus of moral
leprosy is the result of Original Sin. Like the leprosy virus, the
virus of sin subtly corrupts and disfigures the person from within.
Leprosy numbs the body, and the victim is unaware of injury or decay.
Similarly, sin dulls the conscience, and a person remains unaware of
moral and spiritual harm. Leprosy isolates the victim from others and
religious worship just as sin separates us from God and neighbor. Just
as Jesus healed lepers through the ministry of the Church with
compassion, He also forgives sins and restores sinners to a state of
grace and communion with God.

The physical and moral beauty of their future spouses attracts young
people. Each attribute—patience, kindness, humility, forgiveness,
rejoicing in truth—directly counters ugly, sinful tendencies that
threaten the marriage bond, such as the leprosy of pride, anger, envy,
and resentment.

Many couples discover over time that their spouses are not the saints
they imagined but has flaws. Endearing quirks may become annoyances. We
often hear, “He (or she) is not the person I married!” Sometimes a wife
may feel she married Hagar the Horrible, or a husband finds himself
with a Horrible Hag.

After a few years of marital bliss, it may be helpful for battle-weary
husbands and wives to return to St. Paul’s litany of love that they
heard on their wedding day as an examination of conscience:

* Love is patient. But I have been impatient, easily irritated, or
quick to anger.

* Love is kind. But I have been unkind, harsh, or indifferent to my
spouse’s needs.

* Love is not jealous. But I have envied others’ success, gifts, or
happiness.

* Love is not boastful. But I have sought attention or praise for
myself.

* Love is not proud. But I have been arrogant, self-centered, or
unwilling to admit faults.

* Love is not rude. But I have been disrespectful, inconsiderate, or
sinfully crude in speech or action.

* Love does not seek its own. But I have been selfish, putting my
sinful desires over the good of others.

* Love is not easily angered. But I have nursed grudges or lost my
temper.

* Love keeps no record of wrongs. But I have refused to forgive,
brooded over past injuries, and waged a cold war with the silent
treatment.

* Love does not rejoice in wrongdoing but rejoices with the truth.
But I have found satisfaction in others’ failures or ignored the
truth when it was inconvenient.

* Love bears all things. But I have complained or failed to endure
difficulties patiently.

* Love believes all things. But I have been cynical, distrustful, or
assumed the worst about others.

* Love hopes all things.But I have given in to relentless sorrow or
failed to trust in God’s mercy.

* Love endures all things.But I have lacked perseverance in faith,
prayer, or charity.

Are these resolutions of patience, perseverance, joy, and kindness
achievable? Certainly, with God’s grace, as we encounter Jesus in the
Sacraments. What are some practical tips that will direct us over the
next few minutes and hours?

The same newspapers that carried the Hagar the Horrible comic strip
also published the Miss Manners column (Judith Martin). Miss Manners
wrote that politeness is the foundation of morality, or at least
closely related to it.

Good manners, showing respect, consideration, and self-control, are
tiny and practical expressions of morality. Etiquette requires
thoughtful consideration of others before acting. Good manners are
antibodies that protect us from moral leprosy.

The amusing High Church Episcopalian heresy—that we achieve salvation
by good taste alone—need not apply. However, the essential moral
debates raging today—from war and peace to questions of human sexuality
and life in the womb—are manifestations of the tiniest of viruses
rooted in bad manners and disrespect for the human person.

*Fr. Jerry Pokorsky is a priest of the Diocese of Arlington who has also
served as a financial administrator in the Diocese of Lincoln. Trained
in business and accounting, he also holds a Master of Divinity and a
Master’s in moral theology. Father Pokorsky co-founded both CREDO and
Adoremus, two organizations deeply engaged in authentic liturgical
renewal. He writes regularly for a number of Catholic websites and
magazines.*
