**“Gay-Washed” Bible’s imprimatur should be withdrawn. Here’s why.**

By Peter Wolfgang Oct 15, 2025

I am grateful to OSV News for reporting on my concerns about the
USCCB’s granting of an imprimatur to the New Revised Standard Version
updated edition (NRSVue) Bible. I appreciate USCCB Scripture scholar
Father Pablo Gadenz responding directly to my concerns. But I found his
responses unpersuasive, and I still think the imprimatur should be
withdrawn, for the reasons below.

First, a recap for readers unfamiliar with the issue. The updated
edition of the NRSV, the flagship Bible of Mainline Protestantism, was
published in 2022. Protestant Scripture scholar Robert A.J. Gagnon (who
literally wrote the book on The Bible and Homosexual Practice)
immediately flagged it for having “gaywashed” the “clear reference to
homosexual practice in the offender list in 1 Corinthians 6:9 (and 1
Tim 1:10 where the same Greek term appears).” I wrote a Catholic
Answers article shortly thereafter arguing that the USCCB should not
grant an imprimatur until those two verses are fixed. Two weeks ago I
wrote a column for Catholic Culture on the announcement that the USCCB
had granted an imprimatur to an NRSVue, Catholic Edition, with no
change to those verses.

You can read Dr. Gagnon’s 2022 post here and my Catholic Answers
article here. You can read my Catholic Culture column here and
the OSV News article here. I also discussed the issue in an
appearance on Steve Bannon’s War Room, which you can view here.

As OSV News reports, the “primary translation” of the Catholic Church
in the U.S.—the one we hear at Mass—is the New American Bible Revised
Edition (NABRE). The NRSVue, Catholic Edition, has been approved only
“for private use.” So it’s not a big deal, right?

Wrong. For several reasons. As one commenter recently noted at the
Catholic Bible Talk Blog:

You might not realize it, but the NRSV is probably the most widely
used Bible translation in the English-speaking world. It is the
Bible of the mainline Protestant churches and the Catholic Church in
Canada. It is also the Bible of academia; every single college
student who takes a Bible class uses the NRSV, which is why every
August-September the NRSV rockets up the sales charts.

In other words, a Catholic imprimatur for the NRSVue matters. Even if
it is only for private use and even if the Church in the U.S. uses a
different translation for its lectionary. And the objection to those
“gay-washed” verses matters even more.

As Fr. Gadenz told OSV News, the condemnations of homosexual practice
in Romans and Leviticus are still there in the NRSVue. But as
Protestant Scripture scholar Mark Ward noted at the time the NRSVue
was first published, homosexual practice is condemned in only a small
number of Biblical passages. The NRSVue removes three of them,
including two where St. Paul says those who engage in such acts, and
are unrepentant, will not inherit the kingdom of God. That is, the
NRSVue removes something St. Paul said, under the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, regarding salvation. That is a very serious matter.
Indeed, salvation—or lack thereof—is the most serious matter of all.

Again, the Greek word in question is “arsenokoitai.” Mark Ward and
others speculate that St. Paul may have invented the word himself, as
there is no previous record of it prior to Paul’s use of it in 1
Corinthians 6:9-10 and 1 Timothy 1:10. But Paul didn’t invent it out of
thin air. He’s combining two separate words in the Septuagint
translation of Leviticus that mean “men” and “bed”—men-bedders. As Ward
notes, in 1 Cor 6:9 Paul is condemning both the passive (malakoi) and
active (arsenokoitai) partners in male homosexual acts. The NABRE reads
“sodomite,” the ESV “men who practice homosexuality.”

The NRSVue changes the passage to “men who engage in illicit sex,”
which obscures the fact that it is homosexual relations that are being
condemned. Worse, when the Washington Times reported on this
controversy in 2022, they framed it this way:

At issue: Does arsenokoitai (ἀρσενοκοῖται), a Greek word used only
twice in the New Testament, mean all same-sex relations or only
illicit ones?

Does anyone really think that St. Paul was making a distinction between
licit and illicit gay sex? I cannot imagine that this was the same
“debate” the USCCB’s Fr. Gadenz had in mind when he told OSV News that
the updated footnote for arsenokoitai in the NRSVue (“Gk uncertain,
possibly men who have sex with men”) “now acknowledge[s] the view in
the debate that was previously found” in those two verses. But you see
the problem. To claim to be uncertain about whether arsenokoitai
references men who have sex with men is to open the door to all sorts
of ideological mischief. To grant that translation—that uncertainty—an
imprimatur is to say that it is free of doctrinal or moral error. It
seems to me to be in error on both counts.

As I told OSV News, I am not a Scripture scholar. I am relying on those
who are. But I confess to some surprise that I am, so far as I know,
the only writer in the Catholic world to make a public issue of this.
In the early 1990s, fights over so-called “inclusive language”
translations rocked the Catholic and Protestant worlds alike. The
publication of the English language edition of the Catechism of the
Catholic Church was delayed an extra two years over it. It seems to me
that “gay-washing” the Bible is a much bigger deal than male
pronoun-washing it. But I’m the only Catholic mentioning it.

As Mark Ward said, it is out of love for our homosexual neighbors that
we ought to object to this mistranslation. We want them to inherit the
kingdom of God too. It is a lack of love for them to hide from them
what these verses actually say.

Ward also says, “It can’t be an accident that a translation associated
with the Protestant mainline is the first major English Bible to
suddenly find arsenokoitai impossible to translate.” I don’t know what
was in the mind of the translators when they changed those verses. But
the NRSV does seem to reflect whatever is au courant in liberal
Christianity whenever it is being updated. Feminism in the 1980s, LGBT
today. Against the accusation of “gay-washing,” it has been noted that
other condemnations of homosexual practice are still in the NRSVue. But
progressives are master incrementalists. When the Protestant Mainline
updates its flagship Bible again—say, in another thirty years—what
makes you think they won’t “gay-wash” it further?

Again, my gratitude to OSV News for covering this story and to Fr.
Gadenz for his responses. Nevertheless, the problem remains. The USCCB
should consider withdrawing its imprimatur of the NRSVue until those
two verses are re-translated to mean what they actually say.

*Peter Wolfgang is president of Family Institute of Connecticut Action,
a Hartford-based advocacy organization whose mission is to encourage
and strengthen the family as the foundation of society. His work has
appeared in The Hartford Courant, the Waterbury Republican-American,
Crisis Magazine, Columbia Magazine, the National Catholic Register,
CatholicVote, Catholic World Report, the Stream and Ethika Politika. He
lives in Waterbury, Conn., with his wife and their seven children. The
views expressed on Catholic Culture are solely his own. See full
bio.*
