Georgetown Has Declared War on Catholicism

"The mask is off" aptly describes Georgetown Law professors' obscene
distortion of the Catholic Faith to secure legal protections for DEI as
a religion.
* John Mac Ghlionn

PUBLISHED ON

October 13, 2025

Georgetown Law professors William Treanor and Amy Uelmen have crafted a
remarkably dishonest defense of diversity, equity, and inclusion
programs, disguising radical left-wing ideology as Catholic tradition.
Their recent essay in America magazine represents not scholarly
analysis but pure propaganda, a cynical attempt to baptize secular
progressivism with holy water while hoping no one notices the
fundamental contradiction.

The audacity of their argument is staggering. These professors claim
that opposition to DEI constitutes an attack on religious freedom. In
fact, they themselves have already surrendered Georgetown’s Catholic
identity to the altar of woke orthodoxy. They invoke papal encyclicals
and Jesuit tradition to justify programs that would be utterly foreign
to any Catholic thinker before the cultural revolution of the 1960s.
This is intellectual dishonesty masquerading as theological
sophistication.

Consider the manipulation in their core argument. They quote Pope
Francis on including those on the “periphery” to defend bureaucratic
systems that sort students and faculty by skin color and sexual
orientation. They cite Pope John Paul II’s call for solidarity to
justify dividing the human family into oppressor and victim classes.
This is not interpretation but perversion. They take sacred texts and
twist them to serve an agenda their original authors would have
condemned in a heartbeat.

Newsletter

They quote Pope Francis on including those on the “periphery” to
defend bureaucratic systems that sort students and faculty by skin
color and sexual orientation.

The authors know full well that Catholic social teaching has never
endorsed the racial preferences or identity-based hiring that define
today’s DEI programs. They know the Church’s concern for the poor and
marginalized has always rested on universal human dignity and not group
grievance. Yet they present these modern inventions as if they flowed
naturally from centuries of Catholic wisdom.

Their treatment of Jesuit history proves equally disingenuous. They
invoke the order’s missionary zeal and cultural adaptation to justify
contemporary identity politics. They conveniently ignore that those
early Jesuits subordinated every earthly concern to the salvation of
souls and the glory of God. St. Ignatius of Loyola founded his order to
combat Protestant heresy and defend Catholic orthodoxy—not to advance
secular social justice causes that reduce human beings to demographic
categories. The idea that these spiritual warriors would recognize
their successors in today’s diversity administrators would be laughable
if it weren’t so tragic.

The professors’ defense of their curriculum exposes the depths of their
intellectual corruption. Pressed by federal prosecutors over their DEI
agenda, they hid behind the First Amendment and invoked religious
liberty. They claimed the right to teach in accordance with their
Catholic mission. But what mission is that? The mission to split
students by skin color? The mission to trade merit and moral fidelity
for quotas and fashionable ideology? That is not religious freedom. If
anything, it’s religious fraud.

The professors compound their dishonesty by portraying critics of DEI
as enemies of inclusion and justice. But the truth is precisely the
opposite. To oppose DEI is not to oppose inclusion; it is to defend an
older and deeper vision of human dignity.

Catholic teaching has always proclaimed something far more radical than
the bureaucratic jargon of today’s progressives: that every single
person, without exception, is created in the image of God, infinitely
precious, and worthy of respect that transcends race, sex, or social
standing. The Church affirmed this long before “inclusion” became a
trendy hashtag. What DEI calls diversity is shallow bookkeeping; what
Catholicism calls human dignity is an ontological truth.

Perhaps most galling is the way these professors borrow the language of
martyrdom. They pose as guardians of faith under siege, claiming to
stand courageously against government persecution. Again, one might
smirk if it weren’t so sickening. This comes from faculty at an
institution that has spent decades draining its Catholic lifeblood,
steadily removing the Church from its classrooms, elevating professors
openly hostile to her teaching, and fostering an atmosphere where
faithful Catholics feel despised rather than defended.

To watch such people cast themselves as martyrs is a farce. They long
ago gave to Caesar what was meant for God. They abandoned the Cross for
the campus creed, and now they expect praise for betraying the very
mission they were supposed to serve.

The truth is that Georgetown Law, like so many once-Catholic
universities, stopped being authentically faithful decades ago. The
name and the symbols remain, but the substance is gone. The professors’
essay only confirms what has long been obvious: these institutions
serve progressive politics first and Catholic teaching not at all.
Their appeal to Jesuit tradition is not reverence but grave
robbery—digging up the bones of saints to dress their ideology in
stolen vestments.

A truly Catholic response to this crisis would begin with honesty about
what the Church teaches. It would demand courage to live by those
teachings no matter the social cost. It would remember that Catholic
education is meant to form students in wisdom and virtue—not groom them
for political activism. It would trust that hearts transformed by grace
will work for justice in ways that honor human dignity rather than
weaponize it.

The professors may fool themselves, and they may fool their progressive
allies, but they cannot fool history. History will mark their
generation as the one that sold its Catholic birthright for a mess of
ideological pottage. The tragedy is not that they face scrutiny from
the state but that they have earned it by betraying the very mission
they pretend to defend.

Author

* John Mac Ghlionn
John Mac Ghlionn is a researcher and essayist. A contributor to
Newsweek, he covers psychology and social relations. Follow him on
X, @ghlionn.
