The Joys of Consultation: The Pastoral Letter on the Laity

Developing lay pastoral ministry as a kind of substitute for ordained ministry is my worry here.

BY Msgr. Richard C. Antall

PUBLISHED ON October 14, 2025

Our diocese has asked the priests to promote a short survey about the
laity to the faithful for a projected USCCB Pastoral Letter on the
Laity. I wish that there would have been a survey about what kind of
pastoral letters we need from the Bishops’ Conference, for I think the
vocation crisis might be a topic of great interest and importance. I
suppose the Pastoral Letter on the Laity will address the growing trend
of lay pastoral “coordinators” in priest-less parishes, which is having
a moment.

In some ways, the coordination by laity is a throwback to the pioneer
past of the Church in America. However, the small communities who were
building community and church buildings and sacramental practice for
their families did not hire someone to be a sort of substitute priest.
The itinerant priests, who were like the Protestant circuit preachers,
were still leaders and formators of the Catholic community and not just
Mass priests or sacramental providers. In the rust belt, pastoral
coordinators are tending to ever smaller congregations in some historic
(and often, beautiful) churches, and it is hard to escape the suspicion
that it is a program of downsizing, part of the managed decline of once
densely Catholic dioceses.

“Professional” lay “coordination” of parishes has many loose ends. What
kind of training and continuing formation is given to the lay
coordinator? The emphasis on pastoral or formation leaderships would be
interesting in terms of an evangelization project, but sometimes what
is more necessary is management expertise in business-like practices.
Parishes are not businesses, but old physical plants require much
attention, and thin capital reserves need fiscal acuity and creativity.
I think that priests might be able to be pastors of more than one
parish if those burdens were taken care of by persons, perhaps retired
professional management types, who could coordinate more than one
congregation’s issues.

Contact

However, the questionnaire for the Pastoral Letter does not seem to
address such concerns. It is written in a kind of “corporation” prose
that could have been helped by AI. The first question is: “How does
your baptismal identity impact your engagement with Church and
society.”

Perhaps it is my limited experience that makes me think that most lay
people will not have very eloquent answers to this question. Why
couldn’t we start with something about Jesus? What is your relationship
with Him, how have you felt the call to discipleship? And then from
Jesus we could talk about the necessary relationship with the Church
that Jesus founded.

“Engagement with society” is quite (dare we say “too”) broad
conceptually. What about, “How is your discipleship connected to your
everyday life? What are the specifics of your following Jesus and
taking up the cross?” The next question could be tightened up, also:
“How do you feel co-responsible for the work and mission of the
Catholic faith?” Wouldn’t the correct word be “Church,” not “faith”?
But are we asking “feeling” questions or data questions? “Feeling”
co-responsible and understanding our participation in the Body of
Christ might be two different things.

The potential for ambiguity in the survey continues: “Where do you see
the Holy Spirit at work in your relationship/engagement with the
Church?” I suppose the “relationship/engagement” word combo is supposed
to be a fine kind of distinction. Again, something about Jesus might be
to the point. Even if you were asking, “How do you understand the Holy
Spirit working in your life and what has that to do with your
parish/local community of faith?” it might provoke more concrete
responses.

“What are your joys, hopes and visions for the role of the laity within
the Church and society?” is the next question. I know this
echoes Gaudium et Spes, but it reminds me too much of the campaign
rhetoric (like “Hope and Change”). We are all members of the Church,
although our activity “within” the Church should be of our whole person
and not a category of involvement. The laity are the Church, just as
the clergy and religious are, but there seems a note of alienation or
at least differentiation in “activity within the Church.” It’s a nuance
and perhaps a false connotation I am responding to, but it is awkwardly
put.

So is the next shot, in my opinion: “How do you primarily interact with
lay ecclesiastical ministers, formators and lay apostolate leaders?”
This is perhaps the real agenda of the designers of the survey. My
first reaction is what is the use of the adverb “primarily”? I think
they are looking for something like “generally” here. Can you react
“secondarily” to professional lay leaders? Leaders of “lay apostolates”
seem to be in another category for these other coordinators, formators,
etc. People involved in lay apostolates are usually volunteers with
very specific roles.

De-clericalizing pastoral care is a more complicated thing than just
filling roles. When Catholics talk about their parishes, don’t they
usually ask who the pastor is? Are they now to ask who the lay
ministers, formators, etc. are? If deacons sometimes encounter
resistance in their ministry (e.g., “I want a priest for my child’s
baptism,” or “Why is the priest not preaching?”) are we so sure that
the parish can be reimagined with a coordinator who “hires” sacramental
provider priests? Wouldn’t people respond better to a deacon as a
coordinator. Deacons are usually professionals with other capacities,
but couldn’t we hire those who are retired from their original
profession?
If deacons sometimes encounter resistance in their ministry (e.g.,
“I want a priest for my child’s baptism,”) are we so sure that the
parish can be reimagined with a coordinator who “hires” sacramental
provider priests?

“What concerns might you have around lay ministry, formation,
apostolates or the church workplace?” In terms of this essay, I would
say, “see above,” but it is a catchall kind of question, mixing apples
and oranges. And why do we say “church workplace” and not “parish”?

Developing lay pastoral ministry as a kind of substitute for ordained
ministry is my worry here. Laity should participate in Church life,
without a doubt. But isn’t the focus of lay discipleship in the world?
Isn’t a quasi-institutional lay ministry a more complicated thing much
beyond night school certification as lay ministers? Do lay coordinators
have to promise something to the bishop, or do merely contractual
requirements take care of pastoral care of a community?

In Catholic schools we have “teacher-ministers” who really aren’t
sometimes because scarcity of personnel means low formation of those in
the classrooms. Is the vision of the pastoral coordinators wedded to a
tacit acceptance of what is really extraordinary in Catholic life: a
growing Catholic population and a diminishing clergy in a
non-missionary context.

Which is why I would like a Pastoral Letter about the vocation crisis.

Monsignor Antall is pastor of Holy Name Parish in the Diocese of
Cleveland. He is the author of The X-Mass Files (Atmosphere Press,
2021), and The Wedding (Lambing Press, 2019).
