
Uncharted Waters

Evangelizing in a world that lacks the spiritual, cultural, and
intellectual foundations of pre-20th century missionaries is a
challenge that forces us to focus on our one immutable trait -
humanity.
* Anthony Esolen

PUBLISHED ON

October 1, 2025

The Church is a ship sailing a sea unknown—because that is where man
is.

There once were pagans all over the earth, and in the darkest of their
rituals they made their own children pass through the fire to Moloch,
“horrid King besmeared with blood / Of human sacrifice, and parents’
tears.” So did those Carthaginians, whom Chesterton imagined as
Victorian businessmen with black vests and top hats, when times were
bad and trade was off. The rich among them, tenderhearted, would
sometimes spare their own offspring by adopting as their own the child
of a poor family, so that everybody would profit all around. Moloch
would get his feed, the poor would get some bread, and they would get
the credit.

As for the child himself, his body reduced to char and his bones cast
into a necropolis, he no doubt, as apologists for abortion assure us,
would be happy to learn that he had satisfied the god and so many
people at once, rather than live a life of poverty. Yes, there were
pagans, and they believed in many a dark lie. But they stood in fear of
the divine; so when the Christian missionaries came, they could get
some purchase on them. They could speak as men to men before the true
God. But how do you speak to people who sacrifice their children to
convenience? To call it evil is to dignify it beyond what it merits.

When Matteo Ricci put his life on the line to bring the truth of the
Christian Faith to the Chinese, he had spent many years studying their
languages, their ancient texts, their immemorial customs, and their
noblest beliefs about God and Heaven. They possessed a culture—or
rather many related cultures, so vast was their land. It is hardly
possible to be Fr. Ricci now, not because it requires so much study to
speak of God to the modern pagan but because study itself is becoming
increasingly impossible for the young mind—and because there is nothing
left for the missionary to study. For the West has lost its piety in
both senses.

When your ancestors were Christian, and when the Faith, like yeast in
those three measures of dough, leavened their poetry, their music,
their art, their marriage customs, and even their dress, to reject the
faith of your fathers was to reject your fathers too. For in the
deepest core of their lives, whether they were good men or bad, wise or
ridiculous, we find them kneeling. To draw near to any fully human
being is to draw near to him in that still, central place. To refuse to
do so, for your own forebears, is not to cut yourself free but to
enslave yourself to the mass-produced passions of our time. It is also
to miss the beauty nearest to you. It is to be Swiss while despising
the mountains. It is to be Greek and to shut your eyes to the
glittering sea.

The illiterates of old were relatively easy to bring to the life of the
mind. We taught them to read. Our current illiterates do not know they
are illiterate. They do not need to be introduced to the alphabet. They
need to be introduced to thought—or detoxified, led slowly but
decisively away from all things that make thought impossible. For the
internet has placed millions of books before the eyes of anyone to
read, but no one reads books, and the habit of using the internet makes
it less and less likely that people will cultivate the patience
required to read them.
The illiterates of old were relatively easy to bring to the life of
the mind. We taught them to read. Our current illiterates do not know
they are illiterate.

Anger, half-truths, stupidity, quarrelsomeness, slander, wild
exaggeration, stoked-up fear, vindictiveness, hypocrisy, and discord
encircle the world with the tap of a finger. Measured judgment takes
time. Reason requires calm. Detaching strands of truth from a web of
falsehood is a slow and patient and difficult thing, and absolutely
nothing in our schools or the brain-scattering and heart-darkening
media disposes anyone to take up the work. How do you speak to people
who do not speak to one another?

And what of the natural world? What of creation? Despite all the noise
about caring for the earth, never have we been so distant from the
creatures that share the world with us. Your child will come home from
school chattering about global warming. He will not know why there are
such things as summer and winter. What does he learn in school about
cows, wheat, bluebirds, snakes, wild apples, kingfishers, mackerel,
dwarf willows, horses, and seagulls? Blaring lights make the stars
invisible, and billions of people will never see the Milky Way.
Children do not live much in that world. They are sucked into the
gigantic, all-engrossing, digital vacuum cleaner; and the schools sweep
them along.

Even the natural world that is the human person, male and female, has
been deformed, defaced, and denied. Now of all times, some fresh and
cheerful revival of affection and attraction between male and female is
most desperately needed; now, when marriages are rare and children few,
and the sexes are like Milton’s Adam and Eve after they commit the
mortal sin but before they repent of it:

Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning,
And of their vain contest appeared no end.

But not a single institution in our time has taken up the task of
healing and repair. Rather, they are all committed to making things
worse. Feminists envy what they cannot give, as Satan who admits that
he cannot make even himself happy:

Nor hope to make myself less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound,
For only in destroying I find ease
To my relentless thoughts.

And churchmen who never in their lives felt a single warm and normal
attraction for a woman, and others too weak to call things by their
proper names, will prefer to throw the Church into worldwide schism
than to retrace a single step that has led them to the brink. Nature
here must be despised as mere erogenous flesh. Scripture must be put on
the rack and tortured out of joint. The break between East and West
must be cut clean through forever. All the Church’s teachings on sex
and marriage, true, salutary, and difficult, must fly away like dust in
the wind. She must become little more than a social club for
antiquarians, without firm convictions, as flimsy and phony as a
bouquet of plastic flowers over a tombstone. Fiat sodomia, ruant omnia.

When the monks at Iona began that magnificent work of art and devotion
which we know as The Book of Kells, they did not have to persuade their
fellow Christians or the pagans around them that there really was such
a thing as beauty. One thing that strikes me with immediate force is
how colorful the art of the Middle Ages was. All it takes is a glance
at the Duc de Berry’s Très Riches Heures and you know that the dark
brooding of the Renaissance malcontent has not yet settled upon the
soul. But in every healthy society, artists wish to create what is
beautiful or noble or grand or sweet, and that is why they learn the
painstaking lessons from those who came before them. If someone says
that beauty was only for the rich, I should like to remind them of folk
music, of the bright and dashing costumes that peasants once wore for
festive occasions, of the staggeringly beautiful churches and
cathedrals open to everyone, of children everywhere, and of the natural
world that was so near.

Again, the internet can bring great art to anyone’s eyes and great
music to anyone’s ears, but it makes the contemplation of such works
less likely, while music quickly fades from the direct, personal, and
embodied experience of almost everyone alive. In such a world, the
Church, like a dragon snoring away in his cave on a hoard of untold and
unregarded riches, has the task of bringing real music back to the mind
and the soul of man, but instead she fills her pews and the ears of the
faithful with—what? Medieval plainsong? Bach? Palestrina? The haunting
shape-note melodies of Southern Harmony? English folk tunes arranged by
Ralph Vaughan Williams? Lyrics by Prudentius, Ambrose, Bernard of
Clairvaux, Thomas Aquinas, Paul Gerhardt, Isaac Watts, William Cowper,
John Mason Neale, Catherine Winkworth? But this is to beat a dead
horse.

In 1996, when my family and I moved to Coventry, Rhode Island, there
were nine Catholic churches within a mile or two of our house. Now
there are four. Casualties included the Irish church (Sts. Peter and
Paul, boasting a stained-glass window donated by Hall of Fame
outfielder Hugh Duffy, a local boy), the French church (Notre Dame de
Bon Conseil, and its parochial school to boot), a Portuguese church
(Our Lady of Fatima), and another Irish church (St. James, folded into
the French church St. Jean Baptiste). The Italian church we attended,
Sacred Heart, is hanging on for dear life; it had already lost its
school by 1996. St. Vincent de Paul, another survivor, has lost its
school too.

Meanwhile, public education, and those Catholic and private schools
that play tag along, is a bog of impotence, incompetence, and social
diseases such as no one in my childhood could ever have imagined. We
could be once again the instructors of the world, except that the world
does not want to be instructed. Except for perceived political utility,
almost no one can conceive what a human education in arts and letters
means. We could again lead in prayer people who have lost all hope in
the ways of the world, except that the world now has a wide variety of
pills, most of them not pharmaceutical in the chemical sense, to
muddle, distract, and dull.

Again and again I say, these are new things in the world.

Many years ago, I was having dinner with a wise, learned, and pious
gentleman, a priest in the Church of Sweden who would not go along with
that church’s capitulation to the world of sexual breakdown disguised
as liberty and love. He told me that no matter how gray the land had
gone, how far into apostasy his own church had fallen, how evil the
government of Sweden was, the human would remain. It must remain
because it is made by God, for God. He was right—not because there is
some staying power in the human, by its own strength, but because God
will not permit us to sink into complete sub-humanity once and for all.
Yet it may be that He has made that lifeline depend on our own
recommitment to all things human.
The waters are unknown, but the stars are above.

Author

* Anthony Esolen
Dr. Anthony Esolen is the author of 28 books on literature,
culture, and the Christian life, whose most recent work is In
the Beginning Was the Word: An Annotated Reading of the Prologue of
John. He and his wife Debra also produce a new web magazine,
Word and Song, devoted to reintroducing people to the good, the
true, and the beautiful. He is a Distinguished Professor at Thales
College

