Exposing the Left’s Heretical Messiah

James Talarico: a new secular preacher for the left, or a liberalizing
Pied Piper for the right?
* John Mac Ghlionn

PUBLISHED ON

October 9, 2025

Democrats are in dire straits—a circus without a ringmaster, juggling
chainsaws blindfolded. Their party has no clear leader, no consistent
message, and no vision that unites both its restless base and its
fractured coalition. Could James Talarico, a young Texas lawmaker with
a preacher’s cadence and a teacher’s patience, be the answer to their
prayers—or whatever secular substitute they still cling to?

No. His rise is less a solution than a symptom. He is too devout for
the Left, too deceptive for the Right, and ultimately caught in a
catch-22 of his own making.

On the surface, he seems to offer what Democrats lack: youth, charisma,
and the rare courage to speak of God in public. That alone explains why
so many, desperate for direction, rush to his rallies and pour money
into his campaign. But charisma can cover cracks. And in Talarico’s
case, it conceals a dangerous contradiction. He speaks the language of
the Bible, but he wields it in service of ideas that run against the
very faith he professes. His politics are progressive, his theology a
tool.

For years, the Left has chased figures like Zohran Mamdani, radicals
who promise to tear down institutions, topple traditions, and move
fast, even if things break. Talarico is not that. He is earnest,
pastoral, quoting Scripture with a smile. Yet to many secular
Democrats, that is precisely the problem. A party that prides itself on
rejecting religion cannot long tolerate a man who constantly invokes
it. Already, some of his own supporters squirm at his repeated
references to God. Some mock him for it. Others turn away. This is not
a party longing for revival but one lusting for revolution. And
revolutions do not wait for shepherds.

For the Right, he is no refuge either. Talarico cloaks himself in
Christian values, but not in defense of biblical truths. Instead, he
uses faith to bless policies that undermine the very foundations of
Christian teaching—on family, on life, on gender. He is not a Christian
voice within the Democratic Party but a progressive voice that masks
politics with piety. That is why conservatives should see through the
façade. His language may sound familiar, but his ends are alien.

Consider his favorite refrain about “flipping tables.” He borrows it
from Christ cleansing the temple, a moment of righteous anger directed
at corruption. But when Talarico speaks of it, the target is not sin or
sacrilege but rather his political opponents. He takes the story of
Christ’s zeal for holiness and bends it into justification for partisan
crusades. In doing so, he empties Scripture of its true meaning and
fills it with the rhetoric of the Left.

This is the Buttigieg effect in sharper form. Pete Buttigieg tried to
sprinkle sermons into sound bites, quoting the Bible as if it were
merely a progressive pamphlet. Talarico takes the same path but does it
more convincingly because, unlike Buttigieg, he seems to believe it.
That sincerity is why he draws crowds. But sincerity in error is still
error.

The broader picture is clear: Talarico cannot deliver what Democrats
want. To the Left, he is too tied to faith. To the Right, he uses faith
to advance ungodly ends. He cannot bridge the divide because the divide
is not political but spiritual. The Democratic Party has long abandoned
the Christian foundations that once undergirded its leaders. No single
preacher-politician will bring those back, least of all one who
reinterprets Scripture to sanctify social liberalism.
The broader picture is clear: Talarico cannot deliver what
Democrats want. To the Left, he is too tied to faith. To the Right, he
uses faith to advance ungodly ends.

His backers point to his viral clips, his Rogan appearance, his ability
to make some conservatives look foolish with polite quips. But politics
is not a performance, and viral moments do not win enduring trust. What
matters is substance. And on substance, he fails. He may carry a Bible,
but he carries it into battle for the same causes the secular Left has
championed for decades.

Democrats are desperate. They are wandering the wilderness, grasping at
figures who can inspire them. But Talarico is not their Moses but a
mirage. He may promise meaning, but he cannot deliver it. He may speak
of love, but his policies undermine the truths that make love lasting.
He may speak of God, but the god he invokes is one remade in man’s
image: progressive, permissive, political.

The lesson is simple. Do not confuse style for salvation. Do not
mistake Scripture quoted in stump speeches for faith lived out in
truth. And do not let political hunger blind you to deeper realities.
Talarico is caught in a bind: too religious for his own side, too
radical for those who still believe in real religion. That tension
cannot hold. It will tear him apart long before he can stitch his party
together.

America’s crisis is not a shortage of spiritual slogans but a shortage
of spiritual substance. Talarico, for all his eloquence, does not fill
that void. He is not the answer. He is a distraction. And those who
care about the health of faith and the future of this country must see
him for what he truly is.

Author

* John Mac Ghlionn
John Mac Ghlionn is a researcher and essayist. A contributor to
Newsweek, he covers psychology and social relations. Follow him on
X, @ghlionn.

