**Propriety: A Skill to Help Avoid Near Occasions of Sin and Scandal—and to Grow in a Happy Life**

Modernity prioritizes authenticity over propriety, but propriety is
rooted in humility and charity, fosters discernment and reverence, and
guides us to live virtuously and selflessly.

* Ann Burns

PUBLISHED ON

October 24, 2025

If you were to enter into a social setting and comment on propriety,
you’d most likely be laughed at. Perhaps you would be considered a
prude or a snob; the notion of “propriety” is by no means en vogue in
most circles today. And the expression “lack of propriety” sounds
archaic—a turn of phrase to be used cheekily and only in a posh
accent.

After all, modernity prioritizes being authentic and genuine—don’t
capitulate to anyone’s standards. We live in the age
of Hamlet’s Polonius: “To thine own self be true.”

The irony is that this attitude masquerading as virtue is simply
vanity. Where does Christ tell us to be true to ourselves? Aren’t His
words: “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross, and follow me” (Matthew 16:24)?

Contact

But we have replaced the cross with the “I.” I do what I like because I
am most important. “I use foul language because this is who I am.” “I
don’t bother about dressing for the occasion because I like to be
comfortable.” “I am fresh and rude because I think it is funny.” And,
in the age of Polonius, the attitude is lauded. So brave. So real.

But beneath this thin façade is a worship of ego and a disregard for
charity. It is choosing pride over humility. As Catholics, we cannot go
along with this.

Years ago, I was told through the grapevine that some ladies were
remarking on my skirts being a bit short for Mass. At the time, I was
enraged and came up with a slew of reasons to justify my fury. But the
reality is that I had bought into the Polonius lie. My standards—my
style—trump all, and how dare anyone suggest otherwise. While the means
of this scenario were, perhaps, unfortunate (no one likes unpleasant
news secondhand), it was effective. Humiliation can be a huge
eye-opener. I wasn’t dressing to honor my King; I was dressing in the
trends I liked. And there are consequences, seen and unseen.

This may sound extreme, but fast forward a bit: I was talking to a
young woman who proudly showed me a dress she procured. It was a bit
revealing, and as I scoured for the right thing to say, she blurted
out, “It reminded me of that dress you wore.”

Immediately, everything crystallized. We have an audience, whether we
care to admit it or not. I am not even talking about a social media
audience. We have people all around us who watch what we do, don’t do,
say, how we comport ourselves, etc. And while we go about our day, they
are noticing. Who knows how many young girls I may have influenced.

It is necessary to note that this does not mean we should be obsessed
with what people think of us, but rather, that our actions hold weight
(Matthew 12:36, James 4:17). What we do and fail to do has
meaning, it all impacts someone—the people we work with, our children,
family, friends, that stranger we interact with in a coffee shop.

If I had simply asked myself, “Is this skirt appropriate to wear to
Mass and receive Christ, my King?” the answer would have been an
obvious no—a simple assessment which would have saved me so much. But I
wasn’t thinking of propriety; I was thinking of trends and myself. So,
when I was affronted, my ego railed.

Back to Basics

A simple dictionary search of the word propriety reveals that it simply
deals with what is appropriate—for example, “Is (x) appropriate for
this context?” Practicing propriety in our everyday life is a gift. It
teaches us discernment and simplifies everything! St. Catherine of
Siena explained, “the soul that is illuminated with light, has shifted
her deepest motivation away from self-centered concerns, and so
discerns and knows the truth and judges justly” (Letter 207, October
1378).

Discernment is impossible if we are too preoccupied with ourselves. And
propriety is one key that removes us from self-obsession by pointing us
back to simple truths. Propriety paves the way for reverence.
Reverence enables us to look outside of ourselves—living in humility,
prioritizing what is true and good, seeking God with constant
thanksgiving.

Reverence helps us to see life clearly because we grasp God’s
tremendous love and our own littleness. Through reverence, we
understand principles. And from reverence flows kindness,
thoughtfulness, receptivity, and yes, the understanding of what is and
is not appropriate.

Reclaiming propriety means slowing down, which may feel backward when
our phones buzz endlessly with updates and news headlines. We need to
slow down to have time to pray, to think before we speak, to discern.
Who is my audience and am I acting in a way that is appropriate? Does
my behavior align with my Faith?

Propriety eradicates hasty judgments. And often, it saves us from
falling into occasions of sin, potential scandal, and setting a bad
example—real dangers seemingly forgotten when all we care about is
ourselves.

Fr. Lovasik points out in his book The Catholic Family Handbook, “Good
manners are the expression of controlled strength. A person who is
kind…has learned the magnificent art of directing his strength and
controlling merely animal tendencies.” He adds, “The home, often the
place for letting off steam, criticism, and bad manners, should be the
training school for learning to live properly and happily.”
Fr. Lovasik points out in his book The Catholic Family
Handbook, “Good manners are the expression of controlled
strength.”

Manners, as an extension of charity, cannot simply be sported to
impress; they must be constant, starting in the home. This point by Fr.
Lovasik is crucial. Manners often get a bad rap for being a way to
deceive others into only thinking you’re a kind person. But mannerly
living ought to be a fruit of our pursuit of virtue. In striving toward
holiness, we aim to act with propriety and always exercise
charity—first and foremost in the privacy of our homes.

Jane Austen, Manners, and Morality

A good example is Jane Austen’s Mansfield Park, a book that has been
hotly criticized for the heroine’s critique of her friends putting on a
play. But what Austen’s heroine, Fanny, discerns—and her friends fail
to do—is that the play, somewhat salacious in nature, will place people
in situations of intimacy, inviting all kinds of shenanigans.

While it isn’t a question of outright sinful behavior, it is a question
of principle. And while the play is to be performed for their own
amusement, not for public audiences, Fanny still holds fast to her
conviction, asserting that she “cannot act.” Even in 1813, propriety
was eliciting eye rolls.

Mansfield Park illustrates a breakdown between morality and mannerly
behavior—or simply put, seeking God or seeking the world. Are we
raising our children to be trained in all the worldly trends and
successes, or are we prioritizing their understanding of virtue? This
question sets the stage for Austen’s cast of characters. And just like
our present-day age, Austen’s characters are baffled by Fanny’s sense
of propriety and her devotion to what is right, even in the seemingly
innocuous things.

While Austen affirmed manners, traditions, and social graces, she knew
a more important fact: a mannerly person may not be virtuous, but a
virtuous person ought to be mannerly.

When we see manners as a means to make us desirable instead of as
little ways to live out Christian charity, confusion enters the scene.
We become disingenuous—actors in a play—living for the fashions of the
times; and be sure, those fashions will conquer us.

Living Freely

Reclaiming propriety may sound old-fashioned, but it constructs the
necessary parameters for a flourishing life. Today, we are supposedly
freed from societal “constraints” and able to express ourselves as we
will. And yet so many seem to be without purpose. Lost, angry,
mean-spirited, and defensive are all woefully common attitudes.

Of course, in this setting, manners seem ridiculous; we idolize
convenience and “I don’t give a ——” vulgarity. Hold ourselves to a
higher standard? Why?

It is only when we reconnect those manners to morals that it makes
sense. Mannerly living cultivates reverence. It aids us as we grow in
charity and acts as a practical lens to discern what is appropriate. It
helps us to consider our neighbor, exercise charity, and even safeguard
us from potentially dangerous situations.

Through propriety, we start to rediscover virtues like prudence,
obedience, and discretion. It slows life down as we think before we
speak, discern before we act. Instead of finding it laborious, it is
freeing—liberating us from so much muck, shielding us from imprudent
decisions, and training us to live well. And the more we grow in
virtue, the more ourselves we truly become—the saints God created us to
be.

Let us bring back propriety and see how many vices go out of style.

*Ann Burns
Ann Burns is a wife, mother, and the founder of The Feminine
Project.*
