
The Nick Fuentes Dilemma for Catholics

Villainized and lionized, whichever side you find yourself on, Nick
Fuentes can't be ignored.
* John Mac Ghlionn

PUBLISHED ON

October 1, 2025

Nick Fuentes has said things no Catholic should defend. Lines the
Church has long drawn, he has crossed. This cannot be excused, and it
shouldn’t be erased. But once that is admitted, a harder truth remains:
his rise poses questions the faithful can’t shrug away.

At 27, he commands a vast audience. His attachment to Catholic doctrine
appears genuine. He defends marriage with conviction, champions family
without apology, and pushes back on the cultural war against Christian
belief with a bluntness many bishops avoid.

There’s the dilemma. On one side, he is an articulate advocate for
truths Catholics hold dear. On the other, he is a man with baggage that
contradicts those same truths.

The media opts for caricature over clarity. In their telling, Fuentes
is painted as a pure villain, a mix of Hitler and Richard Spencer. His
listeners are treated as nothing more than bigots, and any Catholic who
engages is branded complicit. But the Church has never lived in simple
sketches. The challenge has always been knowing what to do with them.
Why, then, are young Catholic men drawn to him?

Because he confronts what others dodge. He slams immigration policies
that break working families. He denounces foreign wars that enrich
contractors and bury children. He defends masculinity in a culture that
mocks it. He calls out elites who preach inclusion while excluding
Catholics. These are real grievances. He voices them loudly and
unapologetically.

Young men like myself feel targeted by the culture. They hear “toxic”
attached to masculinity and “oppressive” glued to tradition. They see
crime facts dismissed when they cut against the script. They watch
their demographic blamed for everything while others are shielded.

Fuentes meets their frustration with data and defiance, magnetic even
when he wanders where Catholics cannot follow. He can be bold in truth
yet brutal in tone. He critiques feminism with flashes of cruelty. He
calls out crime with words that can veer into prejudice. He marries
clarity with corrosion, forcing Catholics to sift the wheat from the
weeds.

That is the task. Progressives dismiss him outright, pretending nothing
he says holds truth. Many conservatives wave him off as a “weird”
guy in a basement. Both are wrong. We live in an age of absolutes, yet
the Church cannot afford to abandon nuance.

A Catholic approach demands more charity and more clarity. We do not
judge a soul only by its worst sentence; we judge the whole
arc—repentance, amendment, the fruits that follow. I am not calling for
a wholehearted embrace. But folded arms and moral tutting won’t work
either. Fuentes isn’t fading. Quite the opposite, in fact. He is
growing more influential by the day.
We do not judge a soul only by its worst sentence; we judge the
whole arc—repentance, amendment, the fruits that follow. 

And amid the noise, there is a note of grace. Though he and Charlie
Kirk were vocal opponents, when Kirk was killed, Fuentes offered only
condolences to Erika and the children—and prayers. Some say, “So what?
That’s the least he could do.” True. But if he were only chasing
clicks, he could have taken a cheaper, crueler road. He didn’t. In an
era when social media amplifies the foolishness of youth and rewards
immorality, that restraint matters. He now speaks a little slower, a
little more carefully—not perfect, but human, someone capable of
change.

So the questions for Catholics are practical. Can we critique feminism
without sinking into outright misogyny? Can we oppose unjust wars
without chasing crazy conspiracies? Can we face demographic change
without losing charity? Can we defend borders while still seeing
neighbors? I believe we can. These are the questions Fuentes forces
onto the table, and they are questions we should all wrestle with.

Catholic teaching is clear. Good ends never justify evil means. Human
dignity is not a bargaining chip. National pride must never eclipse the
brotherhood we share in Christ.

This tension won’t vanish. The Fuentes moment forces a choice: Can we
take what is factual without baptizing what is fictional? Can we accept
what is useful without excusing what is harmful? The Church has faced
this before. Sinners became saints. Great minds still had blind spots.
The faithful are sorted carefully, with patience and prayer.

This requires spiritual maturity, not partisan zeal. It requires
critical thinking. It means separating the message from the messenger
and sense from insult. Politics demands loyalty to a tribe. Faith asks
for something more complex: to reject hatred without shutting out what
is right and to correct error without killing hope.

Should Catholics engage with Fuentes? Yes—carefully. Engagement is not
endorsement. We need to exercise prudence, not fangirling; fraternal
correction, not fawning applause.

In the end, the Fuentes question is less about him than about us. How
do we remain faithful when leaders fail? How do we resist a hostile
culture without losing Christian compassion? How do we defend a
civilization worth saving without sawing at its Christian foundations?

We have all sinned; Fuentes has sinned, perhaps more than most. He has
said what should not be said. Yet he is young, and youth can learn. If
he is serious about the Faith, repentance can take root and bear
fruit.

The Church should neither canonize nor cancel. Instead, we must watch,
test, correct, and pray. Refuse the lie; keep what is good. And judge,
as the Church always has, by conversion, by actions, and by the
evidence of a changed life—step by step.

Author

* John Mac Ghlionn
John Mac Ghlionn is a researcher and essayist. A contributor to
Newsweek, he covers psychology and social relations. Follow him on
X, @ghlionn.

