**Poverty Isn’t a Path to Heaven**

While caring for the poor has always been a duty of Catholics,
romanticizing poverty is not path to holiness.

*John Mac Ghlionn PUBLISHED ON October 23, 2025*

I was raised Catholic—the kind of Catholic who knew the smell of
incense before the sound of morning cartoons. My father was (and still
is) a farmer, my mother a care nurse tending to the elderly in their
final days. We weren’t poor, but we were acquainted with struggle. So
when Pope Leo recently declared that “love for the poor—whatever
the form their poverty may take—is the evangelical hallmark of a Church
faithful to the heart of God,” I felt something between irritation and
déjà vu. It’s not that I disagree with loving the poor. It’s that many
Catholics seem to have mistaken poverty for holiness itself.

It’s an old Catholic habit, this romanticizing of suffering. Somewhere
between St. Francis stripping naked in the square and the endless
talk of “blessed are the meek,” the Church began confusing destitution
with decency, as if the less you own, the more your soul shines. It’s a
comforting fantasy, especially for those sitting in marble halls. But
equating poverty with purity is as false as equating wealth with
wickedness. The poor can be cruel, the rich can be kind, and goodness
cannot be measured by one’s bank balance or battered boots.

The truth is, the Bible never glorifies poverty; it simply refuses to
lie about it. Scripture speaks of the poor often, not as paragons of
virtue but as people to be helped, fed, and treated with respect.
Christ dined with fishermen and tax collectors alike—not to canonize
deprivation but to shatter the hierarchy that measured worth by wealth.
The command was clear: feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and lift the
fallen—not idolize their condition. Poverty was never meant to be a
stage for holiness, but rather, a challenge for justice.

What Pope Leo calls an “evangelical hallmark” has become a badge of
humility for those who rarely live it. The modern Church doesn’t love
the poor as much as she loves being seen loving them. Somewhere between
the sermon and the snapshot, poverty becomes a prop.

It’s a dangerous delusion because it infantilizes the very people it
claims to uplift. Treating the poor as sacred objects rather than
self-determining people robs them of agency. It’s pity masquerading as
faith. My father used to say, “Work is the prayer God answers fastest,”
and he was right. Real compassion isn’t tossing coins into the
collection plate and calling it charity; it’s creating conditions where
people don’t need your coins at all.
My father used to say, “Work is the prayer God answers fastest,”
and he was right. Real compassion isn’t tossing coins into the
collection plate and calling it charity; it’s creating conditions where
people don’t need your coins at all.

But the Church doesn’t like that kind of talk. She prefers symbols to
systems. She prefers the image of a barefoot priest over the idea of an
educated laborer. When the pope praises “love for the poor,” what he
rarely mentions is the love for competence, for responsibility, for the
dignity of work.

There’s a reason Catholic art is filled with weeping Madonnas and
bleeding saints. The Church has long treated suffering as currency, as
if pain itself buys salvation. This is a mistake. Misery isn’t a
sacrament but a condition—often man-made, sometimes preventable, and
always undeserving of worship. The Gospels tell us to feed the hungry,
not to glorify hunger.

To his credit, Pope Leo speaks often about “different forms” of
poverty—not just material but emotional, spiritual, and social. Yet
this only dilutes the meaning further. By broadening the word to
include everyone, he drains it of weight. If everyone is poor in some
way, then no one is. It’s linguistic inflation. It’s compassion without
clarity.

And yet, I write this not as a cynic but as a Catholic who still
believes in redemption, both personal and institutional. My mother,
after 10-hour shifts lifting bodies and spirits, embodied Christ far
more than any sermon I’ve heard from Rome. Her faith was, and still is,
simple and without show. She never confused poverty with purity because
she saw both up close, sometimes in the same person.

The poor aren’t moral mascots. They’re people navigating life with
whatever scraps of self-respect they can find. Some succeed. Some fail,
just like the rest of us. To elevate poverty to sainthood is to
patronize the very souls Christ treated as equals.

Still, I remain proud of my Faith. Catholicism gave me a vocabulary of
discipline, sacrifice, and genuine awe. But awe without awareness
becomes sentimentality, and that’s where the Church too often lives
today. If love for the poor is to mean anything, it must involve
helping them stop being poor—not through pity, not through pageantry,
but through opportunity, through the structure of education and the
restoration of self-reliance.

Pope Leo may believe poverty is a mirror reflecting the heart of God. I
think it’s a mirror reflecting our own failures—political, human, and
moral. The world doesn’t need more saints of sorrow; she needs fewer
spectators to it.

That’s not heresy but honesty. And if there’s one thing Catholicism
should have learned after two millennia, it’s that truth, however
uncomfortable, is still the closest thing we have to grace.

*John Mac Ghlionn is a researcher and essayist. A contributor to
Newsweek, he covers psychology and social relations. Follow him on
X, @ghlionn.*
