Inside the Remaining Charlotte TLM

It was claimed that having the TLM at parishes was divisive. So,
paradoxically, faithful Catholics were forcibly divided from their
parish communities and sent long distances away, that they may not
worship in the same spaces as their neighbors.
* Sarah Cain

PUBLISHED ON

October 8, 2025

I’ve long been an occasional visitor to the Traditional Latin Mass.
Although it’s a form of the Mass that I have grown to love, the drive
to the TLM was much longer than the drive to my local parish, which
itself leans more traditional than the typical Novus Ordo parish. So, I
would only make the trek once a month, usually on a Thursday evening,
to Our Lady of Grace in Greensboro or St. Thomas Aquinas in Charlotte.
I would likewise attend on major Holy Days—like Ascension Thursday,
which is not celebrated on Thursday locally, being transferred to the
next Sunday by an ordinary who seemed to believe that you would have
more Catholics if Catholics didn’t have to act and worship like
Catholics.

But when Bishop Martin shut down the Traditional Latin Mass in all
parishes and forced those communities to disband, I felt compelled to
join those who were banished to a remote chapel, miles away from the
highway, at the end of a series of two-lane roads surrounded by
cornfields. If we are supposed to be with those who grieve, then this
was the place to find them. In order to express true compassion—from
the Latin cum passio—one must suffer with. It requires presence.
Despite Bishop Martin’s claim to his sheep that he would “commit to
walk with” them, he was noticeably absent.

The holy water font was a simple, wide basin placed on a small circular
wooden table just through the main entrance. For those who traveled
from ornate churches like St. Ann’s in Charlotte or Our Lady of Grace
in Greensboro, this must have felt like being in exile. The overhead
lighting was tacky and more appropriate for a stage than a sanctuary.
One could easily envision a band in place of the altar.

The chapel seems smaller when it is occupied than officially released
photos indicate. Some people were forced to stand throughout the Mass.
There is no choir loft or even a choir area where a small schola might
gather. Instead, there was a modest group of singers huddled in a
circle at the back of the room, cramped between the rear pew and the
main entry door.

The chapel has no organ, so most of the Mass parts and hymns were
sung a cappella. There was something beautiful about this persecuted
group just continuing, doing all they could to worship with what they
had. We had no hymnals, but the music choices were familiar to all
anyway. By virtue of being Catholics, we speak the same language, we
share this collective memory, and few things feel more uniting than
that sense that our hearts have opened to the same words. We were
formed to know how to worship even in the absence of aids.

In truth, the beautiful high altar seems to be a singular reminder that
this is now a chapel of sacrifice, and it clashes with the rest of the
room as an unintentional rebuke. A piece of elevation in a room of
banality only makes clear the dwarfism of all that surrounds it.

The sound system, meant to help the priest be heard during the sermon,
performed poorly, so it was a struggle to hear him. But he consoled the
people by expressing that he understood them. He knew why they drove
for hours to a rural town that people otherwise have no reason to
visit—because lex orandi, lex credendi. How we pray reflects and
informs our belief, and we desire to be transformed by what was given
to us in the Mass that so many of our saints and martyrs would have
found a home in.

After Mass was over and we had sung the Salve Regina, we knelt to say
the prayer to St. Michael and a Memorare for the protection of the
Latin Mass. They were prayers that we said together from memory because
this is our faith—this we share.

It was claimed that having the Traditional Latin Mass at parishes was
divisive. So, paradoxically, faithful Catholics were forcibly divided
from their parish communities and sent long distances away, that they
may not worship in the same spaces as their neighbors.

They were sent to a foreign place that their bishop knew was not big
enough for their needs. They are prohibited from donating to its
improvement, and collections are not taken. They must instead continue
to donate to the parishes that no longer welcome them. We can only
surmise that they are not allowed to make their worship space more
functional or appropriate for the worship of the God they love.
They are prohibited from donating to its improvement, and
collections are not taken. They must instead continue to donate to the
parishes that no longer welcome them.

Those who live in western North Carolina must now travel four or five
hours to arrive in Mooresville simply to go to the Traditional Latin
Mass in their diocese. They have been cut off from the historic,
familiar expression of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Many of those in
Greensboro or Charlotte cannot make such a journey, especially families
with young children or those who have economic hardships or unreliable
vehicles. Let us grieve with them. Let us pray for them. Let us hope
that we may be reunited soon.

A persecution from within always cuts the deepest; but these wounded
people are responding as Catholics always have. Shoved into a
half-hearted attempt at an ersatz chapel, they pray with only the
beauty they have, and with a true unity—a conformity with the Church
that has spanned the ages. Above all, they plead to Heaven: “Sing with
us, ye Seraphim.” Until we can join the Church Triumphant, we will pray
and worship as so many of them once did.

Author

* Sarah Cain
Sarah Cain, known as The Crusader Gal, is a political and cultural
commentator who makes videos about the decline of the West, and she
writes Homefront Crusade. She is the author of Failing
Foundations: The Pillars of the West Are Nearing Collapse.

