**When “Welcome” Collides With Caesar: Dilexi Te and the Missing Question**

*Invoking historical precedents from a different time and legal order to
justify mass illegal immigration in the present stretches analogy
beyond reason.*

BY John M. Grondelski

PUBLISHED ON October 17, 2025

The Apostolic Exhortation Dilexi Te limits its discussion of
“migrants” to three paragraphs: 73–75. Paragraph 73 claims that “The
experience of migration accompanies the history of the People of God,”
citing Abraham, Moses, and the Flight into Egypt. Paragraph 74 focuses
on two 19th-century Church figures involved in the care of migrants in
the Americas: St. Frances Xavier Cabrini and Bishop Giovanni Battista
Scalabrini. Paragraph 75 cites contemporary examples of work with
“migrants,” quoting Pope Francis’ line that “our response to the
challenges posed by contemporary migration can be summed up in four
verbs: welcome, protect, promote, and integrate.” It further reminds us
that every person is a child of God, made in the divine image and
likeness, and insists that “proclamation of the Gospel is credible only
when it is translated into gestures of closeness and welcome,”
concluding that “in every rejected migrant, it is Christ himself who
knocks at the door of the community.”

Before these claims even reach the level of theology, standard logic
would challenge them. The first question arises from what Dilexi
Te does not ask: the legal status of a “migrant.” The Exhortation
simply ignores the issue. There are only “migrants.”

What are we to conclude from that omission? That the legal status of a
migrant is irrelevant? That would surprise nearly every state in the
world, each of which not only distinguishes between legal and illegal
immigrants but among legal categories themselves: temporary workers on
nonimmigrant visas, refugees, asylum seekers, parolees, or permanent
residents. The legal status of a migrant determines that person’s
rights, obligations, and future in the host country. Would the Holy See
tell states to abandon such distinctions? If not, why does Dilexi
Te fail even to acknowledge them?

Or is the Exhortation suggesting that Catholics should disregard the
legality question altogether? If so, that would represent a radical
shift in Catholic teaching about the obligations of citizens toward the
state. If this is now doctrine, when and where was it promulgated? If
it is not, then what is the nature of Dilexi Te’s statements on
migration? Are they opinion, advice, or fervorino? Catholics have a
right to know what binds conscience and what does not. A clear line has
always separated authoritative teaching from pastoral commentary, the
latter not enjoying magisterial weight.

These distinctions matter. What should a Catholic who works for ICE in
field enforcement think? Or a CBP officer at a border checkpoint? Or a
USCIS employee adjudicating claims for status change? Does a Catholic
immigration officer act in bad faith by enforcing his country’s
immigration laws?

Dilexi Te also plays loosely with history. Migration patterns in the
ancient world differed radically from the modern era. Israel lay along
the Fertile Crescent, between Egypt’s Nile and Babylon’s Tigris and
Euphrates. Movement along that route was normal—but not unregulated.
Those who use Exodus 23:9 (“you were aliens in the land of Egypt”) as a
proof text for open borders forget that even St. Thomas
Aquinas noted that Old Testament norms for foreigners were nuanced and
conditional.

Moreover, to use ancient migration as a model for modern policy ignores
the Westphalian system of sovereign states that emerged after 1648.
Modern theology praises “historical development,” yet Dilexi Te seems
blind to the historical development of political order itself. If
doctrine may “develop,” why can’t history? Does anyone in Rome
seriously believe the Westphalian state can—or should—be erased?
The Westphalian system of sovereign states emerged after 1648.
Modern theology praises “historical development,” yet Dilexi Te seems
blind to the historical development of political order.

The discussion of Cabrini and Scalabrini likewise sidesteps the
legality issue. When Mother Cabrini tended an orphan, she did not ask
his legal status, but she lived in an era of lawful, regulated
migration. The late 19th century was marked by large-scale, legally
sanctioned immigration to the United States and Canada. Her ministry,
and that of Bishop Scalabrini, did not conflict with the legal order of
the countries they served. Indeed, the Catholic bishops of the United
States then worked hard to reinforce the idea that “good Catholic”
meant “good American.” It is difficult to imagine John Ireland or
“Dagger John” Hughes endorsing or abetting large-scale illegal entry
into the United States.

Invoking historical precedents from a different time and legal order to
justify contemporary mass illegal immigration stretches analogy beyond
reason. Only by ignoring both history and law can one claim—on Francis’
word—that the verbs governing migration can only be “welcome, protect,
promote, and integrate.”

Does “welcoming” mean disregarding national immigration law? Nothing in
Catholic teaching defines immigration restrictions as intrinsically
unjust. On what basis does the Church think it may ignore—de jure or de
facto—legitimate state law in this area? Under the banner of
“protecting” migrants? When violations of those laws occur on a massive
scale, does the Church’s practical disregard for them amount to
material cooperation with lawbreaking? Or does it evade that charge by
saying it merely “promotes” the cause of migrants, regardless of legal
status?

If immigration controls are a legitimate act of sovereignty, then when
the Church “integrates” migrants sociologically without corresponding
legal integration, it risks trespassing on rights that belong to
Caesar. By fostering sociological integration absent legal status, the
Church effectively pressures the state to create legal pathways, even
though determining such status is a civil competence. Caesar has rights
in justice too—including not to have his hand forced by faits
accomplis.

These are not just questions of “standing with the poor.” They concern
the relationship between Church and state and the Church’s role in
telling states how to adjudicate legal presence, residence, and
citizenship. Their implications reach far beyond charity. To omit the
core issue—legal status—is to discuss migration as if the modern
political order did not exist.

When Jesus was asked about paying taxes to Rome, He did not merely
dodge a trap; He recognized that while God’s primacy is absolute,
Caesar has real, subordinate rights. Vatican II called this the
“autonomy of created things.” Those “created things,” after 1648,
include the sovereign state. No honest discussion of migration can
ignore that fact.

In the end, Dilexi Te’s treatment of migration leaves Catholics with
serious unanswered questions. The Church may and must remind believers
of the moral dignity of every person. But she cannot call Catholics to
actions that imply contempt for lawful authority, nor can she treat the
existence of sovereign states as a regrettable accident of history. If
Rome wishes to speak credibly about migration, it must do so in full
awareness that the world of Abraham and Moses is not the world of
passports, borders, and visas—and that Catholics, while bound by
charity, are also citizens. Between God and Caesar, the Exhortation
seems to have forgotten that both still have legitimate claims upon us.

*John M. Grondelski
John M. Grondelski (Ph.D., Fordham) is a former associate dean of
the School of Theology, Seton Hall University, South Orange, New
Jersey. All views expressed herein are his own.*
