**True Closeness Is Physical Presence: A Response to Contemporary Platitudes**

Our leaders should stop using platitudes about “closeness” and
“accompaniment” and instead accept the truth that our incarnational
Faith requires an actual physical presence.

*Greg Cook PUBLISHED ON October 23, 2025*

Most of us who were alive during the 1970s will instantly recognize the
piano intro to the Carpenters’ massive pop hit “(They Long to Be)
Close to You,” written by Burt Bacharach and Hal David. The song goes
on to sing the praises of the beloved and his many attributes. The
song’s central aspiration is about physical closeness, for which there
is no substitute. Though it may seem far-fetched to use a pop song to
effect change in the Church—though that seems to be the mission of
certain “Catholic” songwriters—I will try to do so. Our leaders,
including the Holy Father, should stop using platitudes about
“closeness” and “accompaniment” and instead accept the truth that our
incarnational Faith requires an actual physical presence, rather than
mere thoughts or words.

At first glance, it may appear that the Holy Father understands this.
In his recently-released exhortation, Dilexi Te, he writes:
“Christian love breaks down every barrier, brings close those who were
distant, unites strangers, and reconciles enemies” (120). But what is
he actually saying? Take, for instance, his remarks about the
parish in Gaza, Holy Family: he assured them of his “closeness and
prayers.” Sorry, Holy Father, but you are in Rome, not the Middle East.
It is primarily the job of the local ordinary to meet the needs
of his flock. Even Pope Francis seemed to understand this when he
spoke of the need for shepherds to smell like their sheep, manifesting
a hands-on care, not one who stays in the house, letting the wolves
prey on the flock without hindrance.

The much-criticized Bishop Michael Martin of Charlotte, North Carolina,
also seems to have a problem with caring for his sheep. Although
he said he would accompany the now-bereft faithful in his diocese
who are devoted to the TLM, he was a no-show at the inaugural Masses at
the new location.

Newsletter

Location. Location. Location. That is the mantra of business owners
seeking success, whether that location is a physical, brick-and-mortar
store, or an online presence on oft-visited platforms. Place should
matter to us, too, because Catholicism is incarnational. God came down
to earth and lived among men. He touched and was touched. Much of His
healing was done in literally hands-on fashion. He was able to heal at
a distance, but that was the exception to the normal practice. Instead,
he trained His disciples to go out and do much of the work. He
delegated.

That might be a lesson for Pope Leo: he is not the world’s
super-pastor. He is the Bishop of Rome and Vicar of Christ, but the
bishops out in the world are the first line of apostolic activity. As a
former bishop himself, and as the onetime head of a Dicastery that made
decisions or at least recommendations on bishops, he should realize
that fact. But even supposing the pope were to do that and let the
bishops be bishops, the fact remains that too many bishops act as mere
bureaucrats or functionaries. They might send out nice-sounding letters
(usually to solicit for funds), but how often does the average Catholic
meet the local bishop? The adage about showing up being half the battle
or something similar (oftentimes attributed to Woody Allen) is true.
Battles are won by armies on the ground, and goals are likewise
attained by those who are at hand, not still at home.
The fact remains that too many bishops act as mere bureaucrats or
functionaries. They might send out nice-sounding letters (usually to
solicit for funds), but how often does the average Catholic meet the
local bishop?

Perhaps I shouldn’t be so hard on the bishops. After all, their
behavior only matches what is going on in society at large. Physical
place or location has been downgraded by the globalists and the
promoters of the new economy. Technology supposedly means people can
live anywhere and work from home or some other remote location. Social
media distorts the view humans have of reality, obliterating distance
as well as the boundaries between public and private. Covid made it
okay for meetings and even medical appointments to take place via
video. But most people live in a tangible world that often has great
significance for them: there are family ties, places invested with
meaning such as homesteads or ancestral lands, and an environment they
particularly enjoy.

Globalism, in its devaluation of place, insists that all places are
equally okay, except when they are not. And that is when the globalists
defend and assist migrants coming from poor places to rich places.
Thus, people who like where they live are inundated with people who are
encouraged and enabled in leaving poverty not to come to a place they
will love but rather to a situation that will benefit them in a
material way. The shepherds will not vow to be “close” to their
existing sheep, but they will stress their “closeness” and willingness
to “accompany” those who come from afar—who should be counseled to
improve their home place of origin rather than inundate someplace else.

Despite all the talk—and it is mostly talk—about accompaniment and
dialogue, Catholic leaders are surpassed by leftists. Any cursory
examination of the wave of demonstrations now and in recent years shows
that the Left and its army of activists know that showing up and
getting physical are of supreme importance. But that’s what happens
when there are large groups of people without traditional employment
and without family ties who are zealous about their hatred of certain
individuals, institutions, and laws.

We might even link the failure of Catholics and Catholic leaders to
fully understand true (not rhetorical) incarnational ministry to a
decline in belief in the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist. If
we give mere lip service to being physically present to shepherd the
faithful, or speak in a vague awareness of the situation, might that
spill over into lip service about the Real Presence? Might a symbolic
“solidarity” with those in need or travail transfer to thinking
Christ’s presence is symbolic?

That need not be the case. Sacred Scripture provides numerous examples
of the difference between mere words about closeness versus the real
thing. Before touching on that, it should be mentioned that the Church
recognizes that people are bound by the physical laws of God’s universe
to one place at a time—except in extraordinary cases. Padre Pio
is reportedto have bilocated in a number of instances. Catholic
historian Paul Horgan, in his sweeping history of the Rio Grande
region, mentions how Venerable Mary of Ágreda appeared to certain
indigenous American groups, preparing them to receive the Gospel from
Spanish missionaries. But those are the exception.

Martha and Mary of Bethany, sisters of Lazarus, both said to Jesus that
their brother would not have died if He had been there. They did not
say, “If You had been thinking of him,” or, “If You had been holding
him close in Your thoughts”; rather: “If You had been here.” The two
disciples on the road to Emmaus didn’t ask Jesus to think of them. They
implored Him to stay with them—human presence and human touch.

Let’s give Pope Leo some credit on this issue. In an address early
in his pontificate, he insisted that artificial intelligence (AI) “can
never take the place of the doctor.” But he still couched his words in
the platitudinous manner of today’s Catholic leaders: “An algorithm can
never replace a gesture of closeness or a word of comfort.”

It seems likely that Pope Leo (Robert Prevost), 70, would also
recognize the pop song referenced at the beginning of this article.
Perhaps he could sing along, “They long to be, close to you,” not in a
theoretical way, not in some bogus “accompaniment,” and preferably not
like Pope John Paul II, who globalized closeness by his numerous trips
around the world. Let it be a real presence. That probably means
applying subsidiarity and letting the bishop of the affected diocese be
the one “close” to those in need. Otherwise, closeness is just a word,
not an incarnational fact.

*Greg Cook is a writer living with his wife in New York’s North
Country. He earned two master’s degrees, including one in public
administration from The Evergreen State College. He is the author
of two poetry collections: Against the Alchemists, and A Verse
Companion to Romano Guardini’s ‘Sacred Signs’.*
