**Can Fallen Priests Be Restored to Ministry? Yes—Here’s How**

The modern priesthood is a lonely place, often little support. Spelling
out ways for priests to safely reach out to their bishops early, when
they are struggling, may save many from tumbling further.

* Matt Robinson

PUBLISHED ON

October 29, 2025

There has been a lot of attention recently on the relationship between
bishops and priests, and rightfully so. This relationship is critical
to a flourishing priesthood, and a flourishing priesthood is critical
to a flourishing Church.

In my experience, the erosion of this relationship has been a top
priority for the evil one. Why? Because the return on investment is so
great. It’s a simple equation: destroy the relationship between
spiritual father and spiritual sons → destabilize the priesthood →
destabilize the Church → hinder the Church’s mission.

It’s the same strategy the evil one uses everywhere: strike at the
heart of the father, and whisper into the ear of the children: “You
can’t trust him.” Once the children are outside the protection of the
father, they can be picked off one by one.

Thanks to the team at The Catholic Project, we have actual data for why
this topic is so important. Their research has clearly illustrated that
relational trust is one of the most significant predictors of
well-being for priests. So, the Church can’t afford to neglect this
issue any longer. The very mission of the Church is at stake.

What is at the heart of this issue?

Ideological divides? Perhaps. Insufficient emphasis on Spiritual
Fatherhood? Likely. A forgetfulness of human dignity? Always.

But those are big topics. Let’s get practical.

Even if none of the aforementioned issues change in the near future,
what is the quickest thing that a diocese can do to begin restoring
trust and renewing the presbyteral culture? Is there a way that, even
if real differences between certain priests and bishops persist (an
issue not new in the history of the Church), we can improve this
relationship based simply on the certainty that all will be treated
fairly?

The answer to those questions is to create a clear process for the
restoration of ministry for priests who are struggling, in a state of
moral injury, or who have engaged in misconduct.

Obviously, excluded from that category are cases of abuse of minors and
other canonical crimes. Those are a very small percentage of priest
misconduct cases, however. The majority of cases are priests who have
fallen into serious sin, crisis, addiction, and the like, but issues
that are not permanently disqualifying from public ministry.

So, the quickest and most impactful thing that bishops and dioceses can
do is devise a compassionate yet accountable process to help restore
that priest to integrity of life and public ministry.

As it is right now, priests in that category (and in general) feel like
all priest misconduct will be treated like abuse cases without a
possibility of restoration of ministry. According to The Catholic
Project, 82 percent of priests regularly fear false accusation. While
most bishops and dioceses likely do not feel that this is an accurate
perception, can we at least imagine feeling so unsafe in our lives on a
regular basis? If “psychological safety” is the number one
organizational predictor of effective work (per Google’s Project
Aristotle), then we’re in big trouble.

One reason this reality is so detrimental is that it incentivizes
secrecy and excessive privacy—the exact opposite of what you want your
presbyteral culture to incentivize. If a priest feels unsafe in
bringing his issues to his spiritual father, then what is he going to
do? Hide. Lean into secrecy. Tumble into shame. Escape using the very
same (or worse) behaviors he wishes he could stop. He feels trapped,
with nowhere to turn; and he likely fears every call from the chancery.
If a priest feels unsafe in bringing his issues to his spiritual
father, then what is he going to do? Hide. Lean into secrecy. Tumble
into shame.

The antidote is for each bishop to establish a very clear process for
the restoration of the ministry of priests who have sadly fallen or
struggled. A well-defined process reintroduces a sense of personal
safety and stability, and it takes the first practical step in
restoring trust based on justice. That process should include the
following:

* Clearly defined benchmarks (and timelines) for the priest to work
toward and be assessed on. These benchmarks include expectations
for conversion of life, evidence of psychological and emotional
healing, sobriety from problematic behavior, genuine contrition,
restitution with wronged parties (if possible), and performance of
penances (if necessary).

* Specific ways that these benchmarks will be measured.

* Evidence-based wellness plans with spiritual, psychological, and
physical components.

* The administration of comprehensive assessments at multiple points
in the restoration timeline to help inform decision-making with
empirical evidence.

* Once a priest has appeared to meet all benchmarks over a period of
time, a lay-led Restoration of Ministry Committee, which advises
the bishop on a priest’s suitability, and, if suitable for public
ministry, recommendations for the type of ministry and the best
support and accountability measures necessary to help him gradually
return.

What’s the point of all this?

First, by solidifying an actual process, a priest can feel a new sense
of safety and trust in his bishop. He will know that he will be
supported if he struggles and sins and that life isn’t over if he finds
himself in a dark place. He will be treated with compassion and
supported to regain self-mastery. He will feel confident that the
Church has put as much time and resources into restoration as it has
into removal.

Second, this process also establishes that a priest who commits
misconduct will not be permitted to return to ministry prematurely,
without genuine, legitimate personal transformation. Actual healing,
restitution, and conversion of life are necessary. There’s no skipping
this step.

Thirdly, not only does this process safeguard fairness between bishops
and priests, it also signals to the laity that they can have confidence
that the Church has simultaneously supported her priests and ensured
they have undergone a legitimate program of remediation before
returning them to ministry.

Many of these priests, God willing, could be our modern-day Pauls and
Augustines. We have to be discerning of the Holy Spirit so that we work
toward protecting the Church without depriving her of priests who have
been transformed by God’s grace. But, in order for that to happen, the
Church has the obligation to provide a sense of safety for priests, and
priests have the obligation to seek help if their holiness of life is
being threatened. After all, eternal life is more important than public
ministry.

Author

* Matt Robinson
Matt Robinson, Director of Clergy Support for the Diocese of Fall
River, MA, and founder of The Shepherd Within LLC, holds advanced
degrees in Theology, Psychology, and Business Administration. He
lives in Rhode Island with his wife and family.
