**Why All Catholics Must Reject the “Judeo-Christian” Label**

*Does the term "Judeo-Christian" point to a spiritual or merely a political reality?*

PUBLISHED ON October 20, 2025 by John Mac Ghlionn

Since the October 7 attacks of 2023, I’ve heard more about
“Judeo-Christian values” than I have about the Beatitudes.
Every pundit and politician now drops the phrase like it’s a secret
handshake. Say it, and you’re in the club. Don’t say it, and suddenly
you’re suspect. The message is simple: a good Westerner waves two
flags—one for your country, one for Israel—and calls it theology.

Catholics should know better. The Church was preaching the Gospel long
before the phrase “Judeo-Christian” ever existed. While the term
originated in the 19th century, it was popularized in the 20th century
to sound inclusive, but now it’s used to demand obedience. Every air
strike, every embargo, every border wall must be blessed with holy
water. You’re not allowed to ask whether any of it aligns with Christ’s
teachings. Instead, you’re told to clap, donate, and move along.

“Judeo-Christian” first crept into public life in the 1930s, mostly
among American Protestants who wanted a catch-all moral cause against
fascism and communism. It was meant to sound broad enough to gather
Jews and Christians under one civil umbrella—less a creed than a
cultural alliance.

By the 1950s, it became political shorthand in Washington. Presidents
invoked it to contrast the “godly West” with the “godless East.”
Theologians warned even then that it blurred both faiths into a kind of
patriotic pudding. But politicians adored it because it turned religion
into a recruitment tool. You could rally voters, sanctify capitalism,
and baptize the Cold War all in one phrase.

After 9/11, the term enjoyed a second baptism. It was used to frame a
new crusade—“the Judeo-Christian West versus radical Islam.” The script
hardly changed. We were still the righteous ones, the others still
barbarians. And after October 7, it’s back again, this time tying
Western virtue to Israeli policy—and propaganda.

As I write this, Israel’s influence machine has found a new mission
field: the American church. With millions poured into PR firms and
“faith outreach,” Tel Aviv is now geofencing worshippers’ phones,
planting sermons, and staging traveling “10/7 experiences” to sanctify
state policy. Pastors are courted, congregations conditioned, and
Christ quietly replaced by a campaign. It’s not evangelism but
engineering. When faith becomes a franchise, and worship a marketing
plan, the line between devotion and deception begins to blur.

Which is why even moments of apparent peace can feel precarious. I know
President Trump deserves credit for bringing a brief calm to the
Middle East. Few others could have done it. But trusting Hamas to
honor peace is like trusting a pyromaniac with a candle. And trusting
Israel to restrain itself when power is on offer is no safer bet. Both
sides bargain in bad faith, bound less by principle than by pressure.
Miracles do happen, though rarely in geopolitics.
But trusting Hamas to honor peace is like trusting a pyromaniac
with a candle. And trusting Israel to restrain itself when power is on
offer is no safer bet. Both sides bargain in bad faith, bound less by
principle than by pressure.

Many Catholics seem to have forgotten that the Church was born before
modern Zionism, before Washington, before any of the alliances we’re
told are eternal. Our faith isn’t a policy platform. It doesn’t come
with a defense budget. The only kingdom Christ endorsed was not managed
by men but martyred by them.

The phrase “Judeo-Christian” sounds tidy until you realize it’s being
used to wrap tanks in Bible verses. It’s less a bridge between two
faiths than a branding exercise for permanent war. And Catholics, of
all people, should smell the incense of manipulation a mile away. We’ve
seen this movie before. Emperors, kings, and presidents always love a
Church that blesses their bombs.

It’s not anti-Semitic to say this; it’s historically literate. Christ
was a Jew. The apostles were Jews. But the Church was built on the
shock that the covenant was opened to everyone. That universality is
the whole point. St. Paul didn’t risk his neck to form a focus group
called “Judeo-Christian Outreach.” He preached that in Christ there is
neither Jew nor Greek, meaning faith had outgrown tribal lines. To now
drag it back under political banners is regression disguised as
reverence.

The term also insults Jews, though few will say it aloud. It turns
Judaism into a backdrop, a prop for people who crave moral weight
without spiritual discipline. Many Jewish thinkers have rejected it for
precisely that reason. It’s less kinship than choreography, a
performance disguised as piety. It cheapens both faiths, turning one
into an ornament and the other into an obligation.

What “Judeo-Christian” really means today is “don’t question our
foreign policy.” You can be as faithless as you like at home—mock the
Church, defund parochial schools, sneer at the rosary—but the moment
you raise an eyebrow at the killing of women and children, you’re
accused of betraying “our shared values.”

Catholicism, on the other hand, demands consistency. You can’t preach
love of neighbor and cheer for civilian casualties. You can’t call
yourself pro-life and fund cluster munitions. You can’t say, “Thy will
be done,” and then outsource your conscience to the Pentagon.

If anything, Catholics should be allergic to this phrase because it’s a
linguistic Trojan horse. It sneaks politics into the pulpit and
replaces theology with talking points. Once you start measuring faith
by military alliances, you’ve already traded the cross for a flagpole.

The first Christians didn’t equate holiness with strategic
partnerships. They followed a man who told Peter to put away his sword,
not sharpen it for the next preemptive strike.

The sad truth is that “Judeo-Christian” has become a nervous tick for
Western politicians who don’t believe in either. It’s what they say
when they want the shine of faith without the burden of it—like a
dieter ordering dessert “for the table.”

Catholics don’t need to borrow anyone’s values. We already have a
catechism, a creed, and a calling. That’s enough. We don’t need to glue
someone else’s politics onto our Gospel. We don’t need to cheerlead for
governments to prove our faith. The only loyalty that matters is to
truth, and truth doesn’t require an embassy.

*Author John Mac Ghlionn is a researcher and essayist. A contributor to
Newsweek, he covers psychology and social relations. Follow him on X, @ghlionn.*
