Edward Feser

Wednesday, August 30, 2023

Fastiggi on Capital Punishment and the Change to the Catechism, Part II

In 2018, Pope Francis authorized a revision of the Catechism of the
Catholic Church, which now states that “the death penalty is
inadmissible because it is an attack on the inviolability and dignity
of the person.”  This might be read as implying that capital punishment
is intrinsically wrong, which would contradict scripture and two
thousand years of magisterial teaching.  As a result, the change has
been criticized as at least badly formulated.  In a recent four-part
series at Where Peter Is, theologian Robert Fastiggi criticizes the
critics of the revision.  The first part of my response to Fastiggi
addressed what he has to say about the obligations of Catholics
vis-à-vis the Magisterium of the Church.  In this second part, I will
address what he says about the teaching of scripture, the Fathers, and
previous popes on the topic of capital punishment.

In our book By Man Shall His Blood Be Shed: A Catholic Defense of
Capital Punishment, Joseph Bessette and I assemble a mountain of
evidence from scripture, the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, two
millennia of consistent papal teaching, and Catholic moral theology, in
defense of the conclusion that the Church has taught irreformably that
the death penalty can in principle be morally licit.  In a follow-up
article at Catholic World Report, I have also explained the conditions
under which the ordinary Magisterium of the Church teaches infallibly,
and have shown that the teaching that capital punishment is not
intrinsically immoral meets these conditions.  In our book, Bessette
and I also set out at length the social scientific arguments supporting
the conclusion that keeping the death penalty on the books for the most
heinous crimes is necessary for public safety.

One of the frustrating things about Fastiggi’s series is that he leaves
much of our argumentation unaddressed.  Furthermore, many of the
objections he does raise are ones I have already rebutted elsewhere –
including in my previous exchanges with him – yet he does not
acknowledge, much less answer, the responses I have already given.  Yet
Fastiggi’s series nevertheless gives the false appearance of
comprehensiveness, in part because of its sheer length, but also
because he will sometimes belabor trivial points.  For example, as we
will see below, he tries vainly to read momentous significance into a
passing allusion Pope Benedict XVI makes to Genesis 9:6 in an obscure
speech on a topic unrelated to capital punishment.  Meanwhile, major
problems for Fastiggi’s position go unaddressed.  Many readers of a
site like Where Peter Is will not only not have read our book, but are
highly unlikely to follow up their reading of Fastiggi’s articles with
a look at our book to see if Fastiggi has represented it accurately, or
if he really has answered all the difficulties facing the abolitionist
case.

Yet another problem is that Fastiggi does not always carefully
distinguish the issue of whether capital punishment is intrinsically
wrong from the issue of whether it is merely better in practice not to
inflict it.  For example, he will often cite some critical remark that
a Church Father or pope makes about capital punishment, as if it were
damaging to the case Bessette and I make.  But typically these are
passages we have already addressed in our book.  And typically they are
passages that would be damaging to our position only if they asserted
that capital punishment is intrinsically wrong, and they do not in fact
do that.  When the issues are disambiguated and formulated precisely,
the passages in question do not have the force Fastiggi seems to think
they have.  Problematic ambiguities like this crop up again and again
in Fastiggi’s discussion.

All of this makes it harder for me to avoid a verbose response.  So, as
I did in part I of this series, I apologize in advance for the length
of what follows.

Scripture and the Church Fathers

As Fastiggi notes, the Council of Trent teaches that “no one may dare
to interpret the Scripture in a way contrary to the unanimous consensus
of the Fathers.”  But as Bessette and I show at pp. 111-118 of our
book, the Fathers of the Church are unanimous in teaching that
scripture allows for capital punishment at least in principle.
Fastiggi disputes this, writing:

This position, though, has been rejected by Pope Francis in his October
3, 2020 encyclical, Fratelli Tutti, no. 265, when he correctly notes:
“From the earliest centuries of the Church, some were clearly opposed
to capital punishment,” and he cites Lactantius (240–320), Pope
Nicholas I (c. 820–867), and Augustine (354–430) as examples.

But the problem with Fastiggi’s argument here is that we need to
distinguish (a) the claim that capital punishment is wrong
intrinsically, or of its very nature, from (b) the claim that while it
is not intrinsically wrong, it is still better not to use it.  As
Bessette and I acknowledge, some of the Fathers, including the ones
Fastiggi mentions, do endorse claim (b), though there are also many
Fathers who reject it.  But what is in question is whether any of the
Fathers endorse claim (a).  And in fact, as Bessette and I demonstrate
in our book, none of them endorses that claim, and Pope Francis does
not say that they do.  Indeed, even E. Christian Brugger, who is not
only opposed to capital punishment but would like the Church to go as
far as condemning it as intrinsically immoral, admits that there is
what he calls a “patristic consensus” on the thesis that capital
punishment is legitimate at least in principle, even among those who
opposed resorting to it in practice (Capital Punishment and Roman
Catholic Moral Tradition, p. 95).

In part 2 of his series, Fastiggi tries to make a big deal of the
fact that Pope Nicholas I was opposed to capital punishment – something
Bessette and I explicitly acknowledge in our book.  But Nicholas does
not condemn it as intrinsically evil.  Fastiggi also suggests that
Tertullian, Cyprian, and Lactantius are exceptions to the patristic
consensus.  But he ignores quotes Bessette and I give in our book that
show otherwise.  For example, in A Treatise on the Soul, Tertullian
says that “we do not account those to be violent deaths which justice
awards, that avenger of violence.”  Lactantius, in The Divine
Institutes, acknowledges that a man can be “justly condemned to [be]
slain.”  In Ad Demetrianum, Cyprian indicates that if Christianity
really were a crime, the state would justly “put the man that confesses
it to death.”  These Fathers did indeed nevertheless oppose the use of
the death penalty in practice, but they do not teach that it is
intrinsically wrong.  Not only Brugger, but also James Megivern,
another prominent Catholic opponent of capital punishment, acknowledge
that the stronger thesis cannot be attributed to these three Fathers
(Megivern, The Death Penalty: A Historical and Theological Survey, pp.
22-26).

It illustrates how desperate Fastiggi is to get around this difficulty
that he even alludes in passing to David Bentley Hart’s criticism
of By Man Shall His Blood Be Shed as evidence that Bessette and I have
somehow gotten the Fathers wrong (though Fastiggi doesn’t explain
how).  The first problem here is that it is not hard to show that
Hart’s review was a dishonest hatchet job, as I demonstrated when
responding to it here and here.  The second problem is that it
is very odd for an orthodox Catholic like Fastiggi to look to Hart, of
all people, for sound exegesis.  Hart is not Catholic and rejects
Catholic norms for interpreting scripture and the Fathers.  Indeed, his
view of scripture is so far from a Catholic one that he is given to
making remarks like this:

Most of the Hebrew Bible is a polytheistic gallimaufry, and YHVH is a
figure in a shifting pantheon of elohim or deities… [In] most of the
Old Testament he is of course presented as quite evil: a
blood-drenched, cruel, war-making, genocidal, irascible, murderous,
jealous storm-god.  Neither he nor his rival or king or father or equal
or alter ego… is a good god.  Each is a psychologically limited mythic
figure from a rich but violent ancient Near Eastern culture…

[The heretic] Marcion of Sinope… exhibited far greater insight than
modern fundamentalists… in that he recognized that the god described in
the Hebrew Bible – if taken in the mythic terms provided there – is
something of a monster and hence obviously not the Christian God.

Hart is also well-known for trying to reinterpret scripture so as
to make it compatible with universalism, which, from a Catholic
point of view, is a heresy.  This is the exegete Fastiggi wants
Catholics to trust to interpret scripture and the Fathers on capital
punishment?

A third problem is that Hart himself has conceded that “it is
perhaps easier for me as an Orthodox Christian than it is for a
Catholic to dismiss Feser’s arguments.”  For some reason, Catholics who
cite Hart against me never quote this remark.

Genesis and the death penalty

Genesis 9:6 famously states: “Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man
shall his blood be shed; for God made man in his own image.”  This
passage has for millennia been understood by Catholic and Jewish
commentators as sanctioning the death penalty, and as Bessette and I
show at pp. 99-101 of our book, there is no plausible alternative way
of reading it.  In De Laicis, Chapter 13, St. Robert Bellarmine
considers and rejects the claim that Genesis 9:6 is merely a prediction
about what will happen to murderers, rather than a decree about what
should happen to them.  Among the points he makes is that such a
reinterpretation is contrary to the traditional Jewish understanding of
the passage.  He points out that in the Targums, the passage is
paraphrased as: “Whoever sheds men’s blood before witnesses, by
sentence of a judge his blood should be shed” (emphasis added).
Bellarmine concludes that Genesis 9:6 “must be taken as an order and a
precept.”  Even Brugger admits that attempts to reinterpret the passage
are hard to defend, and concedes that it remains a “problem” for his
radical abolitionist position (Capital Punishment and Roman Catholic
Moral Tradition, p. 73).

Yet Fastiggi claims otherwise.  He writes:

This Scripture… can actually be used against the death penalty since
the death penalty involves killing.  In fact, Benedict XVI, in his 2012
Post-Synodal Exhortation, Ecclesia in Medio Oriente, n. 26 cites
Genesis 9:6 as evidence that God forbids the killing of even those who
commit murder: “God wants life, not death. He forbids all killing, even
of those who kill (cf. Gen 4:15-16; 9:5-6; Ex 20:13).”  In Fratelli
Tutti, 270, Pope Francis cites Gen 9:6 in his section against the death
penalty for this Scripture stands as a warning to “those tempted to
yield to violence in any form.”

But this line of argument is problematic in several ways.  First, Pope
Benedict’s exhortation was not addressing the subject of capital
punishment.  As the reader can easily verify by looking at the
text, the context in which he made the remark in question was a
discussion of the idea of religious toleration.  What the pope was
saying is that the attempt to coerce others into adopting one’s own
religious point of view sometimes results in violence and even killing,
and that God does not approve of this.  The pope was not even
addressing the topic of criminal justice, let alone the question of
what sorts of punishments are appropriate for which crimes.

Now, it is standard methodology when interpreting papal texts to take
such context into account, and to be very cautious about extrapolating
momentous implications about a particular subject from papal remarks
made in passing in a discourse devoted to a completely different
subject.  Fastiggi violates this methodological principle by
insinuating that Benedict’s remark implies some radical
reinterpretation of Genesis 9:6 and, by implication, some revolutionary
teaching vis-à-vis capital punishment.

Second, it is in any event highly misleading to imply, as Fastiggi
does, that Benedict was “cit[ing] Genesis 9:6 as evidence that God
forbids the killing of even those who commit murder.”  For one thing,
the pope does not pinpoint Genesis 9:6 specifically and then make an
explicit comment about how to interpret it.  Rather, he simply includes
it in a string of scriptural references that are implied to have some
bearing – exactly what bearing, in the case of any of the individual
Scriptural passages, is not specified – on God’s will vis-à-vis
killing.  Benedict never explicitly makes, concerning Genesis 9:6, the
claim that Fastiggi attributes to him.

For another thing, it is quite ridiculous on its face to suggest that
Genesis 9:6 teaches that “God forbids the killing of even those who
commit murder.”  Again, this passage has for millennia consistently
been understood by Catholic and Jewish exegetes to be teaching the
opposite.  Even modern liberal exegetes who have tried to reinterpret
it have only ever claimed that the passage is neutral about capital
punishment, and they have had to strain credulity to go even that far
(as, again, even Brugger concedes).  To suggest, as Fastiggi does, that
the passage is actually condemning capital punishment, is to imply that
Jewish and Christian exegetes, traditional and liberal alike, have all
been misreading it for millennia, and that its true import was revealed
only a few years ago in a passing and oblique reference in a minor
papal exhortation addressing an unrelated topic.  With all due respect
to Fastiggi, this doesn’t pass the laugh test.

Nor is it remotely plausible to attribute such an interpretation to
Pope Benedict XVI, of all people.  Benedict’s program was, famously, a
“hermeneutic of continuity” that eschewed rupture with traditional
Catholic teaching.  It is absurd to propose that he intended radically
to subvert the traditional reading of Genesis 9:6, and with it the
Church’s perennial teaching that the death penalty is not intrinsically
immoral.  It is doubly absurd to suppose that he would do so in a way
that was so extremely subtle and inexplicit that no one even knew about
it until Fastiggi drew our attention to it.  Moreover, while head of
the CDF, then-Cardinal Ratzinger stated in a 2004 memorandum that
“it may still be permissible… to have recourse to capital punishment”
and that “there may be a legitimate diversity of opinion even among
Catholics about… applying the death penalty.”  He could not have said
such things if he believed that Genesis 9:6 absolutely forbade the
execution of murderers.  Once again manifesting a degree of
intellectual honesty that too many Catholic opponents of capital
punishment lack, Brugger acknowledges in the second edition of his
book that in reality, Benedict XVI was “inclined to accentuate the
continuity that exists between the tradition and the moves of his
predecessor” vis-à-vis capital punishment, rather than to take John
Paul II’s teaching in a more radically abolitionist direction (p. xx).

To come to Fratelli Tutti, it is true that, in the context of
criticizing the death penalty, Pope Francis includes Genesis 9:6 in a
list of passages that he says warn of the consequences of violence.
But he is not addressing, much less answering, exegetical questions
about the precise meaning of the passage.  And Pope Francis’s habit of
speaking with imprecision should make any responsible theologian wary
of drawing momentous theological conclusions about some topic from
remarks of his that are not directly aimed at that topic.

Consider, for example, Francis’s remark in Evangelii Gaudium that
“the first and the greatest of the commandments, and the one that best
identifies us as Christ’s disciples [is]: ‘This is my commandment, that
you love one another as I have loved you.’”  What scripture actually
says, of course, is:

When the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they
gathered together, and one of them tested him by asking, “Teacher,
which commandment in the law is the greatest?” He said to him, “You
shall love the Lord, your God, with all your heart, with all your soul,
and with all your mind.  This is the greatest and the first
commandment.” (Matthew 22: 34-38)

Should we conclude that we have somehow been misunderstanding Matthew
22 for two millennia, and that Francis has at last revealed what Christ
actually taught is the first and greatest commandment?  That would, of
course, be absurd.  Quite obviously, the pope’s remark is simply
mistaken, and he was not speaking precisely.  That would be enough of a
reason to refrain from drawing some revisionary theological conclusion
from his remark, but it is reinforced by the fact that he was not
explicitly trying to settle a matter of scriptural exegesis in the
first place.

The same thing is true of the remark in Fratelli Tutti.  The pope
simply gathers scriptural texts to illustrate the idea that violence
has bad consequences.  He does not say that his aim is to settle any
exegetical controversy about the proper interpretation of Genesis 9:6.

The Mosaic Law versus the Gospel?

Fastiggi points out in part 1 of his series that the Old Testament
permitted slavery and polygamy, and that God even enabled the latter in
the case of King David.  Yet the Church has nevertheless rightly
forbidden these things.  He suggests that the case of capital
punishment is similar.  Even though the Old Testament allowed it, the
Church can and should forbid it now in an absolute way.

But this is a false analogy.  The first problem with it is that the Old
Testament merely permits, but does not require, slavery and polygamy.
The Israelites are not told that they must take slaves or marry more
than one woman.  They are told at most only that if they do these
things, then there are certain conditions they must follow.  By
contrast, the use of the death penalty is positively commanded many
times in the Old Testament.  Moreover, these commands are not ad hoc in
nature, directed to some specific temporary purpose (as are divine
directives to the Israelites to destroy this or that pagan city, say).
Rather, the Mosaic Law makes the death penalty a standing and normal
part of the everyday life of the nation of Israel.

Hence, if capital punishment were intrinsically or of its very nature
“an attack on the inviolability and dignity of the person,” we would be
left with the conclusion that scripture not only permitted, but
positively commanded the Israelites to set up the very structure of
their society in a manner that was inherently and gravely contrary to
the good of human beings.  We would be left with the conclusion that
scripture thereby led the Israelites into grave moral error.  But that
is not possible given the Church’s doctrine that scripture cannot teach
moral error.

Perhaps Fastiggi would acknowledge that it was not wrong for the
Israelites to make use of capital punishment, but hold that it is
nevertheless wrong to make use of it under the New Covenant, given the
higher moral demands of the Gospel.  Now, one problem with this is that
the New Testament, too, explicitly affirms the legitimacy of the death
penalty in some cases.  For example, as Bellarmine pointed out, the
deaths of Ananias and Sapphira in the Acts of the Apostles are
essentially divine executions carried out at the behest of St. Peter.
In other words, the first pope not only approved of capital punishment,
but inflicted it himself.  (I have discussed and defended Bellarmine’s
interpretation of this passage in an another article.)

Romans 13:4 famously teaches that the governing authority “does not
bear the sword in vain; he is the servant of God to execute his wrath
on the wrongdoer.”  This has for two thousand years been understood by
Catholic theologians to affirm the legitimacy of capital punishment.
Church Fathers such as Tertullian, Origen, Ambrose, and Augustine read
it this way, as do Doctors of the Church like Aquinas and Bellarmine.
Even Brugger admits that there was a patristic and medieval “consensus”
on this as the correct reading (Capital Punishment and Roman Catholic
Moral Tradition, p. 112).

Fastiggi makes a passing reference to a speech from Pope Pius XII that
alludes to Romans 13:4, and suggests that Pius somehow distanced
himself from the traditional interpretation.  Fastiggi doesn’t explain
exactly how – nor could he have, since Pius says no such thing in that
passage.  Indeed, Pius isn’t even addressing the topic of capital
punishment at all in the passage.  And in fact, as is well known, when
Pius XII did discuss capital punishment, he clearly and firmly endorsed
it.  (Fastiggi is likely borrowing here from John Finnis, who has
vainly tried to make hay out of this passage from Pius XII.  I refuted
Finnis’s flimsy arguments at length here and here.)

Bessette and I address Romans 13:4 and other relevant New Testament
passages at length at pp. 103-111 of our book.  I also address attempts
to reinterpret Romans 13:4 in my response to Hart, linked to above.
Fastiggi offers no response to most of what we say.

But there is yet another problem with Fastiggi’s suggestion that
capital punishment, while permissible in Old Testament times, is
immoral given the higher demands of the Gospel.  The problem is that
the Church for two millennia has taught the contrary.  Indeed, on
several occasions the Magisterium directly addressed this thesis and
explicitly rejected it.  For example, in 405, a bishop inquired with
Pope St. Innocent I about whether civil authorities had to refrain from
using capital punishment after converting to Christianity.  The pope
answered in the negative, appealing to Romans 13 and suggesting that to
forbid capital punishment would “overturn sound order… [and] go against
the authority of the Lord.”

In response to this, Fastiggi notes that Innocent begins his response
to the bishop with the remark that “about these matters we read nothing
definitive from the forefathers,” and suggests that this somehow poses
a problem for those who would appeal to Pope Innocent in defense of
capital punishment.  But there are two problems with Fastiggi’s claim,
whatever the significance of Innocent’s remark (which isn’t obvious).
First, Fastiggi leaves out what Innocent immediately says next:

For they [the forefathers] had remembered that these powers had been
granted by God and that for the sake of punishing harm-doers the sword
had been allowed; in this way a minister of God, an avenger, has been
given.  How therefore would they criticize something which they see to
have been granted through the authority of God?

Needless to say, that is pretty definitive.  Innocent says that the
power of execution was granted to the state by God, and that precisely
for that reason, the forefathers would not criticize the death
penalty.  Second, whatever the forefathers had to say, what matters is
that Pope Innocent I’s remark is itself definitive.  For whatever the
forefathers thought, he, as pope, was being asked to make an
authoritative decision by a bishop who wasn’t sure what to think.  And
his response isn’t to waver, but on the contrary, firmly to declare
that to condemn capital punishment as inherently wrong would be “to go
against the authority of the Lord.”

But there is further papal teaching along these lines.  For instance,
in 1210, Pope Innocent III not only rejected the claim of the
Waldensian heretics that Christians could not resort to capital
punishment, but made repudiation of this thesis a condition of their
reunion with the Church.  Fastiggi alleges that in insisting that the
death penalty could be inflicted “without mortal sin,” Pope Innocent
was merely making a point about the subjective culpability of public
officials rather than the moral character of the act of execution
itself.  But Bessette and I answered this sort of dodge in our book (at
pp. 124-125).  The statement that Innocent required the Waldensians to
assent to reads, in full, as follows:

We declare that the secular power can without mortal sin impose a
judgment of blood provided the punishment is carried out not in hatred
but with good judgment, not inconsiderately, but after mature
deliberation.

Furthermore, in an earlier letter to a Waldensian leader, Pope Innocent
wrote:

Let none of you presume to assert the following: that the secular power
cannot carry out a judgment of blood without mortal sin.  This is an
error because the law, not the judge, puts to death so long as the
punishment is imposed, not in hatred, nor rashly, but with
deliberation.

Notice that the pope is not saying merely that a person might not be
culpable for sin when inflicting the death penalty – as if inflicting
it might still be intrinsically wrong, and it’s just that the
executioner doesn’t know any better, or acts under the influence of
strong emotion, and thus doesn’t meet the conditions for mortal sin.
No, the pope says instead that even when acting with “good judgment,”
“mature deliberation,” “not in hatred, nor rashly,” etc. one can in
that case be blameless in inflicting the death penalty.  And he says
that “the law” itself requires this, not the fallible judgment of the
individual.  Once again, even Brugger admits that those who share his
abolitionism do not have a strong case here, and that Pope Innocent did
indeed intend to teach that capital punishment itself is licit, not
merely that those who inflict it might lack subjective culpability
(Capital Punishment and Roman Catholic Moral Tradition, p. 107).

Yet another relevant papal statement is Pope Leo X’s condemnation of
Luther’s thesis that the execution of heretics is against the divine
will.  Then there is Pope St. Pius V’s promulgation of the Roman
Catechism, which was, naturally, intended as a guide to living
according to the principles of the Gospel, and directed to the Church
universally rather than merely addressing some specific and contingent
set of circumstances.  This catechism enthusiastically endorses capital
punishment for murderers, saying that “the just use of this power, far
from involving the crime of murder, is an act of paramount obedience to
this Commandment which prohibits murder.”  In the twentieth century,
Pope Pius XII taught that “it is reserved… to the public authority to
deprive the criminal of the benefit of life when already, by his crime,
he has deprived himself of the right to live.”

In our book, Bessette and I discuss these and other relevant papal
statements on the subject of capital punishment at length.  Now, if
capital punishment really were inherently contrary to the demands of
the Gospel, we would have to say that the Church has for two millennia
consistently and gravely misled the faithful on a matter of fundamental
moral importance.  We would have to say that when directly addressing
the question of whether the Gospel rules out capital punishment, popes
Innocent I, Innocent III, and Leo X all got it wrong.  Indeed, we would
have to say that the heretics whom Innocent III and Leo X were
criticizing were right, and the popes were wrong.

This is Fastiggi’s idea of upholding the authority of the
Magisterium?!  Which is more likely to reinforce the Church’s
credibility?  The view that scripture and two millennia of magisterial
teaching were right, and that Pope Francis’s revision to the Catechism
is badly formulated and should be revisited in order to make it more
clearly consistent with the tradition?  Or the view that the Church has
gotten things wrong for two millennia, and that only Pope Francis has
somehow finally seen the truth?  To ask these questions is to answer
them.

There is a further irony here.  Commenting on Pope Innocent I’s
affirmation of the legitimacy of the death penalty, Fastiggi claims
that Innocent also allowed “torture,” and suggests that this should
lead us to reject what he says about capital punishment.  One problem
with this is that Fastiggi does not explain why the word he translates
as “torture” should be understood to refer to torments intended to
break the will (which would be torture, and immoral) as opposed to
lesser corporal punishments (which would not be).

But leaving that aside, it is odd that Fastiggi, in order to defend one
pope (Francis) against the charge of error, accuses another pope
(Innocent) of error!  If he is going to suggest that Innocent erred,
then how can he consistently object to those who suggest that Francis
has erred?  Moreover, the cases are not parallel, because there is a
clear and consistent tradition, from scripture through two thousand
years of magisterial teaching, in favor of the legitimacy in principle
of capital punishment.  But there is no such tradition with respect to
torture.  Hence, if Innocent can be wrong about torture, then, a
fortiori, Francis can be wrong about capital punishment.  Fastiggi
thinks that his point about Pope Innocent helps his case, but in fact
it hurts his case.

The Ratzinger memorandum

During the 2004 U.S. presidential election, the question whether
Catholic politicians who support abortion or euthanasia should be
denied Holy Communion became a hot button issue.  Some suggested that
if these politicians were denied Communion, then Catholic politicians
who supported capital punishment or the Iraq War should be denied it as
well.

To clarify the matter, Cardinal Ratzinger, who was then Prefect of the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, sent a memorandum
titled “Worthiness to Receive Holy Communion: General
Principles” (which I briefly referred to above) to then-Cardinal
Theodore McCarrick, who was at the time the archbishop of Washington,
D.C.  (McCarrick has, of course, since been disgraced and defrocked,
though that is irrelevant to the present issue.)  Ratzinger noted that
the cases are not at all parallel, writing:

Not all moral issues have the same moral weight as abortion and
euthanasia.  For example, if a Catholic were to be at odds with the
Holy Father on the application of capital punishment or on the decision
to wage war, he would not for that reason be considered unworthy to
present himself to receive Holy Communion.  While the Church exhorts
civil authorities to seek peace, not war, and to exercise discretion
and mercy in imposing punishment on criminals, it may still be
permissible to take up arms to repel an aggressor or to have recourse
to capital punishment.  There may be a legitimate diversity of opinion
even among Catholics about waging war and applying the death penalty,
but not however with regard to abortion and euthanasia.

Notice several things about this teaching.  As is well known, Pope St.
John Paul II held that the cases where capital punishment is necessary
to protect society are “very rare, if not practically nonexistent” (as
the 1997 version of the Catechism puts it).  Indeed, the pope made even
stronger statements at other times, calling the death penalty “cruel
and unnecessary” and calling for its outright abolition.  All the same,
Ratzinger acknowledged that “there may be a legitimate diversity of
opinion even among Catholics about… applying the death penalty,” and
indeed that a Catholic in good standing could even be “at odds with the
Holy Father” on the subject.  He could not have said that if assent to
the pope’s position was obligatory.  And notice that this is true even
though the pope’s prudential judgment concerned a matter of grave moral
importance, and was put forward publicly, repeatedly, and in stern
moralistic terms.

Note also the reference to “civil authorities,” and how war and
recourse to capital punishment can in some cases be permissible despite
the fact that the Church urges such authorities to seek peace and
exercise mercy on criminals.  The clear implication is that it is
ultimately civil authorities who have the responsibility to make a
prudential judgment about whether capital punishment is necessary, just
as they have the responsibility to determine whether war is necessary.

Some have claimed that the memorandum merely reflects Cardinal
Ratzinger’s personal opinion as a private theologian.  But this is
clearly not the case.  Ratzinger was writing, not as a private
theologian, but precisely in his official capacity as Prefect for the
Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith.  And he was writing to a
fellow bishop precisely to clarify for him a matter of Church doctrine
and discipline.

Furthermore, the passage from the memo quoted above was incorporated
almost verbatim into a USCCB document written by Archbishop William
Levada (who would later succeed Ratzinger as head of CDF).  The purpose
of this document was precisely to clarify for Catholics the same issues
Ratzinger aimed to clarify in his memo.  And the fact that a USCCB
document incorporates the passage in question obviously indicates that
it has doctrinal weight, and is not merely Ratzinger’s personal
opinion.  It is worth adding that even Brugger acknowledges, in the
second edition of his book, that the memo was written by Ratzinger “as
prefect of the CDF” (Capital Punishment and Roman Catholic Moral
Tradition, p. xxviii).

Now, keep in mind that as head of CDF, Ratzinger’s job was to be Pope
St. John Paul II’s doctrinal spokesman.  Hence he was an authoritative
interpreter of the pope’s teaching on the issue of capital
punishment.  Since he explicitly said that there could be “a legitimate
diversity of opinion” about the matter even among faithful Catholics –
and indeed, that faithful Catholics could even be “at odds with” the
pope on the matter – it follows that Pope John Paul II’s position that
capital punishment is no longer needed was not something Catholics are
obligated to agree with.

How is this relevant to Pope Francis’s revision of the Catechism?  The
main difference between John Paul’s teaching and Francis’s teaching is
that the former allowed that there may still be rare cases where
capital punishment is needed in order to protect society, whereas the
latter denies that.  Even Francis’s appeal to the “dignity of the
person” is not novel, because Pope John Paul II made the same appeal
when criticizing capital punishment.  For example, the 1997 edition of
the Catechism says that non-lethal means of dealing with offenders are
preferable because they are “more in conformity with the dignity of the
human person.”

Now, John Paul II’s view that the cases where capital punishment is
still needed to protect society are “very rare, if not practically
nonexistent” was of its very nature a prudential judgment concerning
matters of social science, law, criminology, etc. about which popes
have no special expertise.  For that reason, as Cardinal Ratzinger made
clear, Catholics were not obligated to agree with that judgment.  But
Francis’s view that non-lethal means are in every case sufficient to
“ensure the due protection” of society is also, of its very nature, a
prudential judgment concerning matters of social science, law,
criminology, etc. about which popes have no special expertise.  So, how
can Catholics be obligated to assent to the latter view any more than
they were obligated to assent to the former?  What the Ratzinger
memorandum says about John Paul’s teaching applies mutatis mutandis to
Francis’s teaching.

In part 3 of his series, Fastiggi responds to those who argue that
the Ratzinger memorandum supports the view that papal opposition to
capital punishment amounts to a prudential judgement with which
Catholics are not obligated to agree.  Fastiggi concedes that “perhaps
that argument could have been used prior to the 2018 revision” to the
Catechism.  However, he says, “it cannot be used now” because “that
memorandum has been superseded by the change” to the Catechism, along
with the CDF’s explanation of the change.  For one thing, says
Fastiggi, “the revised text of the [Catechism] articulates a moral
judgment that is not merely prudential.”  For another thing, the
Ratzinger memorandum was in any case “never intended for publication,
as Cardinal Ladaria [then prefect of the CDF] has explained” but was
“just a private communication to some bishops.”

Fastiggi supposes, then, that both the nature of the 2018 revision to
the Catechism and Cardinal Ladaria’s comments about the 2004 Ratzinger
memorandum render that memorandum moot and undermine any argument based
on it.  But both of these suppositions are false.

First, it is easy to show that the revision to the Catechism, no less
than John Paul II’s statements on capital punishment, does reflect
merely prudential considerations.  For the revised text appeals not
only to human dignity, but also to the assumption that “more effective
systems of detention have been developed, which ensure the due
protection of citizens but, at the same time, do not definitively
deprive the guilty of the possibility of redemption.”  Similarly, in
his letter to the bishops explaining the change to the Catechism,
Cardinal Ladaria says that part of the reason for the change has to do
with “the development of more efficacious detention systems that
guarantee the due protection of citizens,” with worries about “the
defective selectivity of the criminal justice system and… the
possibility of judicial error,” with the judgment that “modern society
possesses more efficient detention systems, [so that] the death penalty
becomes unnecessary as protection for the life of innocent people,” and
so on.

These are statements concerning matters of empirical fact about which
churchmen have no more expertise than they have about stamp collecting,
electrical engineering, or gardening.  They are inherently prudential
rather than doctrinal or moral in nature.  And if these prudential
judgments are mistaken (and in our book, Bessette and I argue that they
are mistaken), then the justification for the conclusion that the death
penalty ought entirely to be abolished is thereby undermined.

It is also worth noting that Ladaria’s letter urges civil authorities
“to encourage the creation of conditions that allow for the elimination
of the death penalty where it is still in effect” (emphasis added).
That implies that it may not in fact practically be possible to
eliminate capital punishment everywhere.  And it therefore implies in
turn that abolishing capital punishment is not in fact an imperative
that follows from moral principle alone, but rather follows only when
empirical conditions allow for it.  But whether such conditions allow
for it is, in the nature of the case, a prudential matter.

All things considered, then, while the rhetoric of the revision to the
Catechism is certainly stronger than that of John Paul II, the actual
substance of the teaching is essentially the same.  Hence, as I argued
above, if the 2004 Ratzinger memorandum applied to John Paul II’s
version of the Catechism, then why would it not apply as well to
Francis’s version?

Nor, contrary to what Fastiggi seems to think, do Cardinal Ladaria’s
comments about the Ratzinger memorandum show otherwise.  These comments
were made in a 2021 letter to Archbishop Gomez concerning the
USCCB’s intention of drafting guidelines for dealing with “Catholics in
public office who support legislation allowing abortion, euthanasia, or
other moral evils” yet want to receive Holy Communion.  Because the
2004 Ratzinger memorandum addressed precisely this issue, it comes up
in the exchange between Gomez and Ladaria.  As Fastiggi says, Ladaria
does indeed note that the memorandum “was not intended for publication”
but “was a private communication addressed to the bishops” (and Ladaria
says “the bishops” – not, contrary to what Fastiggi implies, “some
bishops”).

Now, contrary to what Fastiggi insinuates, the fact that Ratzinger’s
memorandum was originally intended to be private is irrelevant to the
issue at hand.  For one thing, the memorandum was still not merely the
private opinion of Cardinal Ratzinger.  Again, it was an official act
of the Prefect of the CDF, acting to clarify for the U.S. bishops the
bearing of Catholic doctrine on a matter of current controversy.  The
fact that the memorandum was meant for the eyes of the bishops rather
than the general public doesn’t change that fact or somehow magically
render it irrelevant to understanding John Paul II’s teaching on
capital punishment.

Furthermore, Fastiggi fails to mention two crucial aspects of Ladaria’s
letter to Gomez.  First, Ladaria does not say or in any way imply that
the 2004 memorandum has been superseded or is otherwise irrelevant.
On the contrary, he tells Gomez that the principles set out by
Ratzinger in the memorandum “may be of assistance in the preparation of
the draft of your document”!  That is to say, far from telling Gomez
and the U.S. bishops that they should now ignore the 2004 memorandum,
he explicitly says that they may make use of it.

Second, Ladaria in no way qualifies this advice in light of the 2018
revision to the Catechism.  Indeed, the topic of capital punishment is
not mentioned at all in Ladaria’s letter to Gomez.  If Fastiggi were
correct, you would expect Ladaria to say that, in light of the
revision, the U.S. bishops should no longer use Ratzinger’s 2004
memorandum, or at least no longer use the part of it that deals with
capital punishment.  But not only does Ladaria not say that, he says
that they may use the memorandum, while saying nothing at all about the
topic of capital punishment.  That would be a remarkable omission if
the 2004 memorandum’s teaching on capital punishment really were a dead
letter in light of the 2018 revision to the Catechism.

If anything, then, Ladaria’s 2021 letter supports rather than
undermines the argument I’ve been defending.  Once again, what Fastiggi
supposes helps his case actually hurts his case.

Odds and ends

As I have said, in a Catholic World Report article from some years
back, I argue that the ordinary Magisterium of the Church has taught
infallibly that capital punishment is not intrinsically wrong.
Fastiggi does not answer those arguments, but in support of the claim
that this has not been infallibly taught, he directs his readers to two
articles by Brugger at Public Discourse, here and here.  But I
answered Brugger in my own series of articles at Public Discourse,
here and here.  Fastiggi also commends to his readers two
articles by Finnis, here and here.  But I answered Finnis too,
here and here.  And Fastiggi calls his readers’ attention to
two Catholic World Report articles wherein he has criticized my views,
here and here.  But I have answered those articles as well,
here and here.  I have also criticized Fastiggi’s views in two
further articles, here and here.  I urge Fastiggi’s readers to
remember that there are two sides to every debate, and that they should
read and consider what I have actually said, and not only what
Fastiggi, Brugger, Finnis, Hart, et al. claim I have said.

In part 4 of his series, Fastiggi asks, rhetorically: “Is fidelity to
the death penalty more important than fidelity to the Magisterium?”
But this too attacks a straw man, because nobody claims in the first
place that fidelity to the death penalty is more important than
fidelity to the Magisterium.  In reality, the critics of the revision
to the Catechism are no less loyal to the Magisterium than Fastiggi
is.  But they insist that loyalty to the Magisterium involves more than
loyalty to Pope Francis alone (even if it does, of course, involve
that) – it involves loyalty to the consistent teaching of scripture,
the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, and all previous popes.  And
they insist too that loyalty to the Magisterium is perfectly consistent
with the respectful criticism of problematic magisterial statements
that the Magisterium itself acknowledges to be permissible in Donum
Veritatis.  Fastiggi has every right to criticize the views of the
critics of the revision.  But he has no right to pretend to be “more
loyal than thou.”

Posted by Edward Feser at 6:32 PM
