**Colligite Fragmenta: Christ the King**

Fr. John Zuhlsdorf October 25, 2025

The royal families of Europe were falling one by one. Secularist
atheistic materialism was on the rise. In the wake of the gory First
World War, Pope Pius XI looked out over a world in chaos.
Industrialization and imperialism, aggravated by political alliances,
had ignited the hideous war with its trench warfare, modern artillery,
and weaponized gas. Vast numbers, many millions, died and were wounded.
Then came the Spanish Flu, sweeping away more lives.

When Benedict XV died unexpectedly of pneumonia in 1922, Achille Ratti,
then Cardinal Archbishop of Milan, was elected to the See of Peter in
the longest conclave of the century. He probably also took the longest
to accept. When asked if he accepted, he reportedly pondered in silence
for several minutes, as if shouldering the weight of the world. One
Cardinal quipped that they had “put him through the 14 Stations and
then left him on Calvary.” He took the regnal name of Pius XI and the
motto “Pax Christi in regno Christi… The Peace of Christ in the Kingdom
of Christ.”

From the start, his motto signaled his intent. His first encyclical,
Ubi arcano (1922), lamented that World War I had not brought peace and
that new wars threatened. He deplored the conversion of churches to
secular use and pointed to concupiscence as the root of societal ills.
Only under the Kingship of Christ, he said, would there be true peace.
Three years later, in 1925, with his encyclical Quas primas, Pius XI
established the Feast of Christ the King, fixing it on the last Sunday
of October, the month Communists had hijacked for the exaltation of
their “permanent revolution.” In a diabolically ironic twist, the term
“permanent revolution” had been penned in 1844 by Karl Marx in a work
called The Holy Family. The Devil always tells you what he is doing.

“Permanent revolution” in Communist praxis meant that goals must be
pursued without compromise with the opposition. Some have suggested
there is a parallel with the now seemingly endless “walking together”
sessions, those processes of endless redoing and reimagining that
attempts to create a permanent “process” within the Church herself.
“Revolution” in Latin is “res novae …new things.” For the ancient
Romans, “new” was by default bad, a sign of instability and rebellion.

Thus Pius XI, by choosing the final Sunday of October, deliberately set
the Kingship of Christ in direct opposition to the godless novelties of
the modern age.

In placing the Feast there, he also situated it just before All Saints’
Day and the month of November, which dove-tails with Advent and its
emphasis on the Second Coming of Christ. Through Christ celebrated as
King, Mother Church sweeps us into a liturgical meditation on the Four
Last Things: Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. This Sunday begins the
salutary season for getting our priorities straight.

Pius XI stressed that Christ has dominion and authority over all
created things. Christ is King of Kings and Lord of Lords (Rev 19:16).
Hence, both individuals and societies as a whole are obliged to submit
to Christ as their King. This includes nation-states. Where Christ does
not reign, when Christ is rejected, people are reduced to
depersonalized widgets, disposable by the powerful in the charnel house
of atheism. Lenin’s harrowing image comes to mind: “You have to break
eggs in order to make an omelet.”

As Pius XI wrote in Quadragesimo anno (1931), “no one can be at the
same time a good Catholic and a true socialist.” He warned that
socialism was not merely an economic or political theory but a
comprehensive attempt to reshape the human mind and soul:

It devotes itself above all to the training of the mind and character.
Under the guise of affection it tries in particular to attract children
of tender age and win them to itself… in order finally to produce true
socialists who would shape human society to the tenets of Socialism.

His words read today like a prophecy fulfilled. After decades of
propaganda in academia, ideologues have succeeded in producing
generations who know nothing about civics or history, whose curiosity
and capacity for reasoning have been stifled. Through relentless social
programming, they have produced obedient little parrots in the public
square. Look what is happening in the streets of large American cities,
with the violent antics of young – teamed with their aging hippie
allies reliving their rebellious youth.

Speaking of broken eggs, one might recall the meme of a smiling young
woman who posted, “Think of socialism like a fancy baked good. Just
because many have made a mess of their kitchen attempting it, doesn’t
mean you go around declaring you’ll never eat soufflé again! It just
means you try harder!” To which some wag replied with a black-and-white
photo of soldiers standing over charred skulls and bones: “Oh no! I
burned the soufflé again.”

The grim joke exposes the dark fruit of utopian ideologies. When Christ
is not King, humanity burns its own soufflé, over and over again.

Pius XI’s warnings and calls are even more pressingly relevant today.
One might, however, ask whether nations will bother to pay attention to
the Church’s call when the Church herself has in effect stopped reading
Pius XI. After all, all that unpleasantness was before the New Starting
Point of 1962. The Church herself has blurred the sharp lines of the
Kingship of Christ in her liturgical prayer. Lex orandi, lex credendi …
as we pray, so we believe. The reciprocal relationship between
liturgical prayer and belief means that when we change the way we pray,
over time we change what we believe. This principle has profound
consequences. In subsequent decades, those who reformed the liturgy
shifted the emphasis from Christ’s immediate and present Kingship over
nations to a distant, eschatological fulfillment after the Second
Coming. In the old calendar, Christ the King was celebrated in October;
in the new, it was moved to the last Sunday of the liturgical year. The
shift is not merely calendrical but theological.

Consider the Collect for Christ the King in the Vetus Ordo:

Omnípotens sempitérne Deus, qui in dilécto Fílio tuo, universórum Rege,
ómnia instauráre voluísti: concéde propítius; ut cunctæ famíliæ
géntium, peccáti vúlnere disgregátæ, eius suavissímo subdántur império.

Almighty eternal God, who in Your beloved Son, the King of the whole
universe, desired to reestablish all things: propitiously grant; that
all the families of the nations, separated by the wound of sin, may be
brought under His most sweet sovereignty.

Nations. Here and now.

Christ must be acknowledged as King over all human institutions. Now
compare the Novus Ordo Collect for the Last Sunday of the Liturgical
Year celebrated as Christ The King:

Almighty eternal God, who desired to renew all things in Your beloved
Son, the King of the universe, graciously grant that the whole of
creation, having been freed from servitude, may zealously serve Your
majesty and praise You greatly without end.

No question that Christ is the King of the universe. Yet sin is not
explicitly named; the reference to nations—the secular order—is gone.
The cosmic replaces the social. “You decide,” the preacher says, but
the implications are clear. Week after week, the prayers of the modern
Missal have shifted content: less penance, less spiritual warfare, more
optimism.

Change how we pray, and over time we change what we believe. Change
those, and you change how we live privately and how we engage in the
public square.

St. Augustine, in the City of God, wrote that earthly governments are
themselves punishments permitted because of Original Sin. Our fallen
institutions reflect our fallen nature. They are transient, passing
forms of order that must ultimately yield to the eternal reign of
Christ.

In the letter to the Colossians, chosen by the Church as the Epistle
for Christ the King, St. Paul sings of that cosmic Lordship:

Brethren: [We give] thanks to the Father, who has qualified us to share
in the inheritance of the saints in light. He has delivered us from the
dominion of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved
Son, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins. He is the
image of the invisible God, the first-born of all creation; for in him
all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible,
whether thrones or dominions or principalities or authorities—all
things were created through him and for him. He is before all things,
and in him all things hold together. He is the head of the body, the
church; he is the beginning, the first-born from the dead, that in
everything he might be pre-eminent. For in him all the fulness of God
was pleased to dwell, and through him to reconcile to himself all
things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his
cross.

This hymn, perhaps drawn from the earliest Christian worship, gathers
up all the dimensions of Christ’s Kingship — cosmic, redemptive,
ecclesial. Christ is the image of the invisible God, as St. Hilary of
Poitiers wrote: before creation the Son was the perfect invisible image
of the invisible God; in the Incarnation, He became the perfect visible
image of the invisible God. “He who has seen Me has seen the Father”
(Jn 14:9). In Christ all things hold together: creation, redemption,
and the Church herself, His Body.

“He is the head of the body, the Church,” Paul continues. The Pope, as
Vicar of Christ, is the visible representative of that Head, not the
Head itself. Christ alone is King, Head, and Lord. His Kingship is not
an abstraction for pious meditation but a living reality encompassing
“all things.” Pius XI intended exactly that: all rulership was and is
His, including the secular realm. When the will of earthly rulers and
the will of Christ diverge, catastrophe follows. Look around.

Modern man, wandering in the darkness of self-worship, gropes like one
stumbling at night in a familiar room, searching for the light switch.
In mortal sin we are blind, until through confession, through grace,
light floods in. “Then — BAM! — light and relief.” So too at the end of
time, when Christ gathers all creation to Himself and submits it to the
Father — BAM! — there will be light. “Let us be with the saints in
light when that day comes.”

On the other side of the veil and of the glass is LIGHT. Light from
Light is sharing Light with us in every instant of our existence, and
in special beauty and power in the sacraments and the lucid teaching of
Holy Mother Church. Stick to the Light. Christ reigns now. He reigns
from the Cross, by the Blood that reconciles “all things, whether on
earth or in heaven.” He reigns sacramentally in the Eucharist and
socially in any nation that dares to proclaim Him King. He reigns in
the hearts of the faithful who live His law in their families,
workplaces, and communities.

The Postcommunion prayer of the Vetus Ordo for Christ the King captures
this militant note:

Immortalitátis alimóniam consecúti, quaesumus, Dómine: ut, qui sub
Christi Regis vexíllis militáre gloriámur, cum ipso, in cœlésti sede,
iúgiter regnáre possímus.

Fed with this immortal nourishment, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that we
who glory to fight under the standard of Christ the King, may forever
reign with Him on the heavenly throne.

Note the imagery: we are members of the Church Militant, soldiers under
the banner of our King. There is an Enemy who works relentlessly to
strip Christ the King from the thrones of our hearts. The “prince of
this world” (Jn 14:30) seeks to blot out the social Kingship of Christ
through confusion, compromise, and fear. We are warred upon
relentlessly. We must soldier on, brick by brick, under the banner of
the King, using all the weapons and gifts He has endowed His Church
with.

Contrast that to the Postcommunion of the Novus Ordo: “O Lord, we
entreat you, may your sacramental mysteries perfect in us that which
they contain, with the result that what we are now performing in
outward appearance, we may grasp in the truth of things.” Not bad, not
false, but a little pale. It’s an abstraction rather than a rallying
cry.

We are our rites! The texts we pray form the souls that pray them.

Some accuse the traditional liturgy of being dour, overly focused on
sin and propitiation, while lauding the modern rite for its “forward
look” toward eschatological joy. But joy without repentance is
presumption. The Vetus Ordo too points toward Heaven, yet it shows more
clearly how to attain it. The reformers, perhaps optimistic after
another global war, systematically edited out those “negative” ideas —
sin, guilt, penance, spiritual warfare — forgetting that without them
the Cross itself becomes incomprehensible.

What can we do? As Sam Gamgee’s old gaffer would say, “It’s the job
that’s never started as takes longest to finish.”

We begin by renewing our allegiance to Christ the King, both inwardly
and publicly. Pius XI asked that on this feast the Act of Consecration
of the Human Race to the Sacred Heart of Jesus be recited publicly.
Those who participate can gain a plenary indulgence. So, find a church
or chapel where it will be done.

Go to confession. Gain the indulgence. Firm up your loyalty to Christ,
King not of hidden hearts only but of every street, home, and nation on
earth.

And because we are all in this together, invite someone who has never
been to the Traditional Latin Mass to go with you. Never underestimate
the power of your invitation. With the prevenient grace of the Holy
Spirit, a single invitation can change a life. The Enemy never sleeps;
neither should the soldiers of Christ the King. Fed with immortal
nourishment, we glory to fight under His standard. The world is in
upheaval, but the banner of the Cross still flies, defying the false
kings of history. The Peace of Christ in the Kingdom of Christ — Pax
Christi in regno Christi — remains the Church’s watchword. And though
the revolution rages and the night deepens, Light from Light still
reigns, and His Kingdom shall have no end.

When we look at the chaos in the world, when we see with sorrow the
conflicts in the Church, we must never leave kneeling at the feet of
our King. I’ll wrap up with this from Scott Hahn:

Christ is King and His kingdom, while not of this world, exists in this
world in the Church. We are a royal people. We know we have been loved
by Him and freed by His blood and transformed into ‘a kingdom, priests
for his God and Father.’

Fr. John Zuhlsdorf is a convert from Lutheranism, ordained to the priesthood in 1991 by St.
John Paul II in Rome for the Suburbicarian Diocese of Velletri-Segni.
Classics at University of Minnesota. Licence and Doctoral studies in
Patristic Theology at the Augustinianum in Rome. Formerly a
collaborator of the Pontifical Commission “Ecclesia Dei,” moderator of
the Catholic Online Forum, columnist for The Wanderer and the UK’s
Catholic Herald, Fox News contributor. Speaker.
Blogist. fatherzonline.com @fatherz
