**Fighting the Snail: How Medieval People Thought**

[1RLK-150x150.jpg] Robert Lazu Kmita, PhD
October 28, 2025

Recently, an excellent article by Mr. Robert Keim, a passionate
historian of medieval culture, caught my attention. Entitled “The War
between Knights and Snails” and published on his Substack channel Via
Mediaevalis,^ the essay was dedicated to one of the mysterious
drawings found in illuminated manuscripts—an image depicting a battle
between armored knights and… snails. Yes, you read that right: warriors
armed to the teeth are shown charging—most often with a lance, more
rarely with a sword—against a snail that helplessly contemplates the
calamity that has befallen it. What could be the meaning of such a
strange artistic representation?

After reviewing several modern interpretations proposed by various
authors, Robert Keim sets out to unravel the mystery of the snail using
the hermeneutical “glasses” specific to Christians of the Middle Ages.
These “glasses” have as their main lens an axiom stated by our author:

(…) medieval symbolism derived from the belief—and a mind-opening,
life-transforming belief it is—that physical realities are primarily
symbolic, and that their observable features were chosen for
symbolic purposes by the eternal and all-knowing God.

This is a crucial statement that describes the core of Medieval man’s
belief in the symbolic value of nature and its contents. In other
words, every creature is a sign through which God Himself teaches us
something valuable and precious. Of course, none of these “signs” are
accessible to minds lacking Wisdom. And Wisdom cannot be attained
without humility. But humility can be received as an invaluable gift
only if we accept that everything has been created by a Divine Mind
infinitely superior to our own human, created minds. If we accept this,
the Holy Ghost Himself takes upon Him the responsibility to guide and
teach us the deep and hidden meanings of creatures, things, and words.

Before returning to Robert Keim’s article and to the symbolism of the
battle with the snail, I will add just one more aspect related to the
content of his quotation above. When Keim says that the “observable
features” of creatures have a symbolic dimension, this statement
implies that absolutely all creatures—even the most insignificant
ones—conceal divine reasons that represent God’s thought or plan
regarding their transcendent purpose. Every being or thing in nature
has a divine reason—called by Saint Maximus the Confessor the lógos
(from the Greek λόγος) of that particular creature. And the origin of
all the created logoi is the supreme Logos Himself—Christ the Savior,
that is, Divine Wisdom itself.

Thus, from eternity, God has conceived the meaning, value, and ultimate
purpose of every creature. When we make the effort to discover or
decipher within a creature the divine reason through which God teaches
us something, we are reading the book of Nature, which, together with
the sacred texts of the Bible, is meant to guide us toward the eternal
Kingdom of Heaven. That is what we shall do right now—seeking to
decipher the meaning of the mysterious drawing of knights fighting
snails.

Robert Keim’s Interpretation

Let us first look at the interpretation proposed by Robert Keim. He
carefully observes the drawings, which indeed seem to reveal an
important detail: the horns that bear the snails’ eyes are directed
toward the knights, resembling spears. The same detail was noted by
medieval art historian Dr. Lilian M. C. Randall, quoted in Keim’s text:

The most common form of representation shows a knight armed with
mace or sword confronting a snail whose horns are extended and often
pointed like arrows.

Indeed, when looking at such drawings, one might naturally wonder how
snails could defend themselves against attackers. What better answer
could there be than suggesting that the horns are used like arrows? How
else could a snail defend itself? Obviously, this is an unrealistic
answer, valid only for an illustration. In reality, a snail has no
means of defense other than retreating into its shell.

Remembering childhood moments when I used to delight in seeing how
quickly snails retract their tiny horned eyes when you touch them
lightly with your finger, I smiled as I read Robert’s explanation. Keim
draws a parallel between the snails’ arrow-like eyes and the horns of
demons in traditional iconography. He then poses — rhetorically — the
question that reveals the essence of his interpretation:

A horned, (spiritually) blind creature that confronts, and even
defeats, the chivalrous warriors of Christendom? That sounds like
the devil to me. Horns are integral to the entire history of
iconographic representation of Satan, insofar as they were inherited
from the goat-horned pagan god Pan.

A number of other drawings from medieval illuminated manuscripts, where
horned snails appear somewhat sinister, seem to support the
interpretation that associates snails with infernal beings—demons. Yet,
there may be more to it than that. Especially if we learn from a short
but erudite note — “The Virgin Snail” by Helen S. Ettlinger — that far
from bearing only negative symbolic connotations, the snail can also
have remarkable symbolic meanings.

In a work by Dominican friar Francis of Retz (c. 1343–1427) titled
Defensorium inviolatae virginitatis Mariae, Ettlinger discovered the
following statement:

If the dew of the clear air can make the sea snail pregnant, then
God in virtue can make His mother pregnant.^

Thus, the snail is, no more and no less, an analogical symbol of the
Holy Virgin Mary. A similar interpretation of great importance,
mentioned by Louis Charbonneau-Lassay (1871–1946) in his monumental Le
Bestiaire du Christ (The Bestiary of Christ, 1940),^ shows that
toward the end of the Middle Ages, some artists associated the snail
with the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ—as in
certain Western interpretations where the snail symbolizes
regeneration, resurrection or rebirth.^

So here we have two interpretations in which the snail is associated
both with the second Person of the Holy Trinity—the incarnate Logos,
Jesus Christ—and with the Queen of the Universe, the Holy Virgin Mary.
How, then, could such a small creature acquire negative, demonic
connotations like those implied in the interpretation of the knight’s
battle with the snail? It seems we are faced with a contradiction that
deserves serious consideration.

When I read Robert Keim’s article, I was immediately struck by memories
of earlier readings in which the symbolism of the snail had been
thoroughly discussed—though not in connection with illuminated
manuscript drawings, but with the coat of arms of a Georgian-born
hierarch who lived in Wallachia.

The Coat of Arms of Metropolitan Antim Ivireanul and the Ambiguity of Snails

Antim Ivireanul (c.1640–1716) was a tireless scholar and polyglot who,
as Orthodox Metropolitan of Bucharest (today the capital of Romania),
carried out extensive work as a writer, translator, librarian, editor,
and printer of works now considered gems of Romanian literature. Given
that he also published the famous medieval Italian anthology the Fiore
di virtù (The Flower of Virtue), it is clear that we are dealing with
an Eastern hierarch open to Western Catholic tradition. His interest in
Western heraldic sources is also evident from the fact that he placed
his mitre beneath a galero—a cardinal’s hat—a detail that itself would
merit deeper investigation.^

What interests us here, however, is that the central figure on Antim
Ivireanul’s coat of arms is a snail.

(Figure 1 – darkened)

Above the entrance to Antim Monastery—built between 1713 and 1715—there
is a depiction of a snail said to have been sculpted by the
Metropolitan himself, known for his many artistic talents. Moreover, an
old account says that the key to that church door was also
snail-shaped. All these details, together with his coat of arms,
testify to the importance Antim attributed to the snail. But what
symbolic meaning did he ascribe to this tiny creature?

Over the past decades, several authors have tried to decipher this
mystery. The most interesting interpretation belongs to Father André
Scrima (1925–2000). In an essay titled Timpul Rugului Aprins (The Time
of the Burning Bush), he sees the image of the snail as a “graphic
metaphor of the monk’s cell:”

In the representation intended by Antim, the cell, like the snail’s
shell, is itinerant—it accompanies you everywhere (unlike the
‘stationary’ building where you spent your novitiate). If at first
the monk was ‘in the cell,’ now the cell has been interiorized: it
is ‘in the monk.’ Do we perhaps glimpse here an almost
autobiographical confession from the founder nearing the end of his
earthly pilgrimage? In any case, the dialectical coherence of the
symbol as presented suggests a rhythm of withdrawal (‘into
yourself’) and reappearance (‘outward’).^

Thus, just as the snail withdraws into and emerges from its shell, the
monk’s life is characterized by withdrawal and concealment from the
world, interrupted—through the ordinances of Divine Providence—by brief
returns to it. This dialectical movement between interiority and
exteriorization, according to Scrima, is the key to interpreting the
heraldic snail—and perhaps even more than that.

A second noteworthy detail is the six-pointed star toward which the
snail on the coat of arms extends its antennae. Formed by two
interlaced triangles—representing the intersection of the “visible” and
“invisible” worlds from the Christian Creed—this star, the famous
Clavicula Salomonis, would be the goal toward which, emerging from the
spiral labyrinth of his monastic shell, the contemplative monk aspires
in the practice of mental prayer, known in Eastern Christianity as the
“prayer of the heart.”

Personally, the most interesting detail in André Scrima’s
interpretation is a quatrain from the 1972 critical edition dedicated
to Antim Ivireanul:

All creation, says the prophet,
Sing to the Lord in every place.
And even the snail, its horns upraised,
Teaches us all to praise His grace.^

This small poem presents the snail as an unintentional teacher of
adoration. Paraphrasing King and Psalmist David, Antim alludes to those
Old Testament verses emphasizing the implicit praise all creatures—no
matter how insignificant—offer to their Creator. The snail, by raising
its horns toward heaven, is like a pious monk lifting his hands to the
Most High. It is quite significant that this learned author chose
precisely this tiny creature, especially within the Romanian cultural
context, where the snail has always had a positive connotation.

“I know of no belief in which the snail is attributed with harmful
powers,” writes one of the most renowned modern researchers, Mihai
Coman.^ The question remains, then: how is it that in the
illuminated manuscripts that captured Robert Keim’s attention, the
snail appears as a malevolent creature, worthy of being attacked by
knights?

Another Possible Interpretation

Unlike us modern city dwellers, medieval people undoubtedly had a
broader and more precise knowledge of all living creatures. The
specific traits of each species were clearly understood, and their
symbolic interpretations were based on these features. Yet, animal
symbolism often carried ambiguity—because what was interpreted was not
the animal itself, but one of its particular traits, and that depended
on context. Saint Maximus the Confessor, following Saint Dionysius the
Areopagite, emphasized that the symbolic interpretation of creatures in
Holy Scripture is always contextual.

For example, the lion can symbolize—through its mighty, sharp teeth—the
devil, who tears apart the faith of his victims through heresies and
false teachings. Saint Peter is clear about this, warning us to defend
true doctrine against the devil “as a roaring lion, [who] goeth about
seeking whom he may devour” (1 Peter 5:8). Yet the same majestic
animal, because of its courage and royal bearing, can symbolize
kingship itself—and not just any kingship, but that of Jesus Christ,
explicitly called in the Book of Revelation “the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, the Root of David” (Revelation 5:5). Thus, the same creature can
symbolize both the negative pole of creation—the devil, who seeks to
tear apart the Church through schism and heresy—and, in another
context, the second person of the Holy Trinity, God the Son.

In the case of the knight’s battle with the snail, as presented by
Robert Keim, it is clear we are dealing with a negative instance of the
small creature. The demonic interpretation is indeed plausible: the
snail’s horns can easily recall the devil’s. Yet there is another
complementary possibility, suggested by André Scrima’s interpretation
of the snail’s shell. Looking at Rembrandt’s famous painting
Philosopher in Meditation (1632), one immediately perceives the sense
of inward deepening—while the shell, as a dwelling place from which the
snail eventually disappears at death, may represent our fallen,
labyrinthine world. The idea I draw from contemplating a shell is,
therefore, that of the labyrinth—the loss of oneself in the world.

Moreover, as mentioned earlier, medieval people based their
interpretations on traits they observed directly in nature, unmediated
by electronic devices and digital screens.

The snail has one obvious and striking characteristic: its slowness. It
barely moves. It seems almost dead rather than alive, for everything
about it happens in extreme slow motion. Reflecting on this most
visible trait, the vice it most readily evokes is laziness—or even
acedia, spiritual sloth. Medieval depictions showing not only knights
but also peasants or craftsmen fighting snails seem to confirm the
presence of a universal vice—one that had to be confronted by all,
regardless of social class. In this context, we may recall the teaching
of Saint Mark the Ascetic, who described the three great demonic giants
that constantly attack us as ignorance (of the sacred), forgetfulness
(of God), and spiritual laziness.^

So, let us say we accept the identification of the snail with laziness
or, worse, with acedia (which, for both the Desert Fathers and medieval
monks and nuns, was the most terrible of all vices). But what does the
knight signify? Or the woman who sometimes appears trying to prevent
the attack on the snail?

We cannot answer such a question without first recalling another
principle of allegorical-symbolic interpretation, present in leading
pagan, Jewish, and Christian authors such as Plato, Philo, and Saint
Ambrose. In short, this principle affirms that living beings or animals
can symbolize, in certain contexts, internal principles of the human
soul.

Concerned with the destiny of the soul in eternity, Plato left us,
through his dialogues, the testimony of an extraordinary effort to
recover a state that we, as Christians, might identify with that of
Adam and Eve in Paradise before the Fall. Of all the dialogues,
probably very few contain such a detailed investigation of the soul as
Politeia (usually wrongly translated as The Republic). Here we find an
extensive discussion of the ways in which we can purify ourselves from
the metaphysical ignorance in which we are held captive in our current
condition. This discussion gave rise, through Boethius and Martianus
Capella, among others, to the sum of those disciplines—grammar,
rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music—grouped
under the famous name septem artes liberales (the seven liberal arts).

However, the essence of Politeia lies in the detailed description of
the soul and its current state, which resulted from a mysterious
ontological mutation whose origin Plato never discusses explicitly in
any dialogue. Among the deeply significant images of man, one appears
in the final part of the dialogue, in passages 588b–588e, where the
soul is described as a whole containing three distinct beings. The
first, the truly rational one—symbolizing the mind—is man himself. The
second, symbolized by the lion, represents the spirited or irascible
part of the soul. Finally, the third, described simultaneously as
serpent-like and having many heads, is the monster that signifies the
appetitive, desire-driven part of the soul. Thus, three different
beings—the man, the lion, and the many-headed beast—joined together
represent the human soul and all its “powers.”

In one of his most famous treatises, De opificio mundi (On the Creation
of the Cosmos), Philo of Alexandria (c.20 BCE–c.50 CE) offers an
interpretation of Adam and Eve’s original sin, starting from the
premise that this reprehensible act is the universal archetype of every
sin ever committed by any human being at any moment in history.
According to this view, Adam and Eve can be interpreted symbolically
and allegorically as the first two humans in history who, being at the
same time true universal archetypes of all humanity, represent certain
faculties of the human soul. Thus, Adam symbolizes the rational part of
the soul—the intellect (Greek νοῦς – noûs), while Eve symbolizes
sensation or emotion (Greek αἴσθησις – aisthēsis).

Saint Ambrose of Milan read Philo’s treatises with great interest and,
in some cases, adopted the same interpretations. In his
symbolic-allegorical commentary on Genesis, De Paradiso (On Paradise),
Saint Augustine’s master identifies Adam with the mind or reason (Latin
mentem) and Eve with sensation or sensibility (Latin sensum). In other
words, he translated Philo of Alexandria’s interpretation into his own
theological framework, following it faithfully.

From all these three interpretations—to which many others could be
added—we can now deduce the principle mentioned earlier: the beings
involved—the man, the lion, and the many-headed monster in Plato; Adam
and Eve in Philo and Ambrose—each represent a dominant principle within
the human soul. Could we, then, apply the same kind of interpretation
to the images in illuminated medieval manuscripts showing knights
attacking snails? I strongly believe we can. Here is what such an
interpretation might look like.

The key characters are two: the attacker (usually, though not always, a
knight) and the attacked (the snail). The first could symbolize that
human being restored by grace, whom Saint Paul calls “the new man, who
according to God is created in justice and holiness of truth”
(Ephesians 4:24). The snail, on the other hand—a symbol of sloth and
acedia—may well represent “the old man, who is corrupted according to
the desire of error” (Ephesians 4:22). Of course, this struggle
concerns not only knights but every baptized Christian.

In some depictions, a third figure appears: a woman who seems to try to
stop the assault on the “beast.” Could she not, as in Philo and Saint
Ambrose, symbolize precisely the sensitive part of the soul—the one
attached to earthly pleasures, which always seeks to temper the ascetic
and spiritual impulses of Christians? Very likely, yes.

Thus, this would be the symbolic-allegorical interpretation I propose
as a complement to Robert Keim’s reading. On the other hand, I think it
is worth emphasizing and remembering not only the meaning of such
medieval representations but also the restrained humor with which the
anonymous masters who created them enriched their works. For we must
always remember that the extraordinary culture that produced so many
wonders—among them the Gothic castles and cathedrals—was not only one
of labor and seriousness but also of the joy and cheerfulness of those
who firmly believed that the Kingdom of Heaven is open to all who know
the path of humility and repentance. This was, indeed, a thought not at
all foreign to Saint Philip Neri!

^ Robert Keim, “The War between Knights and Snails:”
https://viamediaevalis.substack.com/p/the-war-between-knights-and-snail
s [Accessed: 20 October 2025].

^ Helen Ettlinger, “The Virgin Snail,” in Journal of the Warburg and
Courtauld Institutes, Volume 41, Number 1, 1978, p. 316. Ettlinger’s
note is presented and discussed by Patricia Simons in her article
“Salience and the Snail: Liminality and Incarnation in Francesco del
Cossa’s Annunciation (c. 1470),” included in the anthology edited by
Jennifer Spinks and Dagmar Eichberger, Religion, the Supernatural and
Visual Culture in Early Modern Europe. An Album Amicorum for Charles
Zika, Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2015, pp. 305-329. The interpretation of
snails in Renaissance painting proposed by Simons also deserves a
separate discussion just like that of Robert Keim’s reference author,
Lilian Randall.

^ Louis Charbonneau-Lassay, Le Bestiaire du Christ, Milano: Arché,
1985, p. 929.

^ Ivan Evseev, Enciclopedia Simbolurilor Religioase și Arhetipurilor
Culturale (Encyclopedia of Religious Symbols and Cultural Archetypes),
Timișoara: Învierea Publishing House, 2007, pp. 364-365.

^ Did this mean that he equated his position as metropolitan with
that of Cardinal in the Roman Catholic Church? In any case, it is
certain that the representation of the cardinal’s hat was a clear sign
of his interest in the Western, Catholic, heraldic-allegorical
tradition.

^ André Scrima, Timpul Rugului Aprins. Maestrul Spiritual în
Tradiția Răsăriteană (The Time of the Burning Bush. The Spiritual
Master in the Eastern Tradition), București: Humanitas Publishing
House, 1996, pp. 124-125.

^ Antim Ivireanul, Opere (Works), Critical edition and introductory
study by Gabriel Ștrempel, Bucureşti: Minerva Publishing House, 1972,
p. 325, apud André Scrima, op. cit., p. 126, note 11.

^ Mihai Coman, “Melcul” (“Snail”), in Mitologie Populară Românească
(Romanian Folk Mythology), Volumul I: Vieţuitoarele pământului şi ale
apei (Tome I: Creatures of the Earth and Water), București: Minerva
Publishing House, 1986, p. 209.

^ For many details see “Three Deadly Giants and How to Fight
Them:”
https://kmitalibrary.substack.com/p/three-deadly-giants-and-how-to-figh
t [Accessed: 20 October 2025].

Categories Art
Robert Lazu Kmita, PhD

Robert Lazu Kmita is a novelist, essayist, and columnist with a PhD in
Philosophy. His first novel, The Island without Seasons
, was published in 2023. He is also the author and coordinator of
numerous books (including an Encyclopedia of J.R.R. Tolkien’s World –
in Romanian). His articles have appeared in The Remnant, The
Imaginative Conservative, Saint Austin Review, Gregorius Magnus,
Catholic World Report, Second Spring, Radici Cristiane, Polonia
Christiana, The European Conservative and Philosophy Today, among other
publications. Dr. Kmita publishes regularly at his Substack,
Kmita’s Library.
