**The Wholesome Truth Behind “Trick or Treating”**

Charles A. Coulombe October 30, 2025

::

   A soul! a soul! a soul-cake!
   Please good Missus, a soul-cake!
   An apple, a pear, a plum or a cherry,
   Any good thing to make us all merry,
   One for Peter, two for Paul,
   Three for the One (Him) who made us all.
   —Traditional Souling Song

With the approach of Halloween, another “Holiday” battle begins.
Unlike the annual fracas every December which pits believers in
Christ’s birth and cultural traditionalists on the one side against
those who believe that the celebration of Jesus’ birth should be
submerged in a generic “Holiday Season,” this one sends Christians
against Christians. On the one side are those who believe that
anything to do with the dark or spooky – to include Halloween itself –
must be linked directly to the Satanic. On the other are those who
believe that there is nothing wrong with a bit of a fright – and more
importantly the carving of pumpkins, the wearing of costumes, and the
collection of candy in one of the few remaining communal observances
left in modern North America. The cause of the latter is not helped by
the ever-increasing appropriation of Halloween by Wiccans and outright
Satanists, as well as the fact that it has outdone Easter as the number
two holiday in retail terms. Against this onslaught, most Christian
defenders of Halloween have only wholesome memories or parties and
trick-or-treating to offer in defence of their position.

Of course, the entire societal scene has grown much darker – indeed,
much more Satanic since this writer was a child in the 1960s.
Infanticide is embraced by both political parties, and – if their
behaviour during COVID is to be believed – most of the Catholic Church
hierarchy believe their Sacramental ministrations to be optional
extras, ultimately unnecessary for Salvation. Their attitudes are
echoed by the laity in the universalism that Pope Benedict XVI decried
in 2016. In such an atmosphere, one might be forgiven for thinking
that almost anything or anyone, from presidents to prelates, may well
be agents of the prince of darkness – as indeed we ourselves are so
often whenever we sin.

But we do need to get a grip, and remember the reality underlying all
else: the Church’s teachings are true, and her rites efficacious,
regardless of follies in Church and State. We need to remember that a
great deal of what we take as information regarding the preternatural
comes from Protestant sources, who often regard Catholicism (and
Orthodoxy) as little better than paganism. The meaning of symbols can
change over time, and if we are not aware, we can make egregious
mistakes. Many regard the pentagram as a symbol of witchcraft and
evil. Not knowing their history, they do not realise that the
Satanists invert it, as they do the Crucifix, to blaspheme it. In this
they are not trying to offend the Wiccans and Neopagans, who use it in
an upright manner, but its older Christian meaning. As readers of Sir
Gawain and the Green Knight will remember, to our Catholic fathers it
symbolised both the Five Wounds of Christ and the Five Joys of Our Lady
(two more were added later to this number). Tourists visiting
California’s Missions may be horrified by seeing the Eye in the
Triangle on various of St. Junipero Serra’s chasubles. Lest they
assume that the Golden State was a Masonic plot from the beginning, it
were well for them to remember that the offending image was a perfectly
decent symbol of the Trinity in Medieval times. Spain in the 18^th
century had not yet gotten the news that it was to be reserved to the
use of an Order whose basic belief – Conduct over Creed – would one day
completely obscure St. Junipero’s message of Salvation through Christ
and His Church. Indeed, in this area, most of us are probably as
Masonic as those who have undergone their strange rites of initiation.

This kind of straining after gnats subsequent to a full dinner of whole
camel is very common to-day, and can give us quite the feeling of
virtue. Into this situation falls poor hapless Halloween and its
central – if latter-day – rite of Trick or Treat. So we must use our
imaginations, and return to a time when Europe was Catholic and
primarily agrarian. Even in the towns with their merchants and
artisans, markets and fairs, and their cities (who added cathedrals to
the other four items of urban life in that time), as in the countryside
with its forests, fields, and manors, there was no secular popular
entertainment; no movies, radio, television, nor computers. Life was
very much governed by the dogmas and practises of the Church – and of
the latter, not least the Liturgical Calendar.

From the rites of the Church re-emerged the theatre, in the form of
miracle, morality, mystery, and mummers’ plays, which brought the
teachings of the Church to life in full view of the faithful. These in
turn filtered down to everyday life. Depending on specific locales,
eves of major feasts – Candlemas, Ss. Philip and James, the Nativity of
St. John the Baptist, St. Peter in Chains, All Saints, and the
Circumcision in particular, though there were others – lent themselves
to bonfires, ghost stories, and the like. Folklore spoke of various
sorts of enchantment, of fairies, ghosts, and witches – of
preternatural evil repelled by supernatural means – the Church’s
Sacramentals in particular. There were often also performers – usually
local youths or children – going from house to house, singing seasonal
songs or performing simple plays that illustrated the nature of the
season.

The triduum of All Hallows tide – the Eve of All Saints, the feast
itself, and the following day’s observance of All Souls – lent itself
to all sorts of these observances, given that all of us have many
deceased loved ones – family and friends. As with other such vigils,
folklore played a big role; in many places, the dead were believed to
return for meals with their families – ideas that survive in Catholic
places from Brittany to Mexico.

There was in a great number of places – and especially in the British
Isles – “Guising” or “Souling.” Dressed in costumes, believed in some
places (though far from everywhere) to hide one’s identity from any of
the hostile unseen forces, people went from house to house, soliciting
goodies in return for prayers for the living and dead of the house
visited. In places where this was called “Souling,” “Soul Cakes” were
the expected reward, along with some variety of the song quoted at the
beginning of this article.

After the Protestant revolt, a lot of these customs were continued,
although severed from their original intent due to the new official
theology, which frowned on prayers for the dead (a liability which
would be overwhelmed by the tide of aspirations after the bloodbath of
World War I, but that is another story). A great many of these then
crossed the Atlantic during the colonial settlement of the Atlantic
States, and with subsequent immigration. Among them was Halloween.

Of course, it was somewhat different from what it had been. Although
its Irish proponents still prayed for the dead, most of its Scots
importers did not. Halloween parties were spooky, and often included
light-hearted fortune-telling, generally aimed at figuring out one’s
future spouse. The bonfires survived; and the tradition of playing
pranks and tricks grew up. As the 19^th century went on the tricks
escalated into widespread vandalism. (This era is depicted in the
Halloween scenes of the classic film, Meet Me in St. Louis.) “Trick or
Treat,” developed as a kind of extortion – and it was no empty threat.

After World War I, cities across the United States made a determined
effort to end the mayhem. From these efforts emerged the sanitised
trick-or-treating with which we are familiar, as parents were
encouraged to get younger children into the act and accompany them
while doing so. Advertising swiftly arose to encourage the trend – not
least by makers of both candy and holiday decorations.

As the 1930s wore on, and both the horror and science fiction genres
arose in the movies – Dracula, Frankenstein’s Monster, the Wolfman,
the Mummy, and (after World War II) the Creature from the Black Lagoon
accompanied diverse aliens and robots in joining the ranks of ghosts
and witches in the ranks of trick or treat costumes. After World War
II, trick or treating came into its own; in many ways the 1950s were
(as with so much else) its Golden Age. This continued into the late
1960s.

My own first experience with the practise came in 1964, in Mount Kisco,
New York. My brother was dressed as the devil; I was at once Heckle
and Jeckle, two wise-cracking cartoon blackbirds. We went out with a
mob of neighbourhood kids. Suburban Westchester County was in those
days a Trick-or-Treaters paradise. The houses were all decorated for
the holiday; having “helped” my father to carve our own Jack O’Lantern
that night, I fancied myself a connoisseur of pumpkin sculpture. I was
not disappointed by the various faces the locals bestowed on their own
gourds. But above all was the delicious haul of candy that fell to
us. When we returned home, filled with delight, our parents only
allowed us a single piece of candy each. The rest was saved for All
Saints’ Day, we were told. Needless to say, the almost immediate
consumption of the candy was a prominent part of our celebration after
our return from Mass the following day.

Oddly enough, after we moved to Hollywood, California we were still
able to trick-or-treat. Hard to believe though it may be now,
Hollywood in those days still had a large proportion of middle-class
families. Of course, it was still Hollywood, and the film monsters
earlier referred to were represented everywhere on Hollywood
Boulevard. Given that our landlord was the then famous television
psychic Criswell, Halloween never quite left our premises at any time
of year; but to be fair, he and his wife were very generous in the
candy department.

Eventually we left Hollywood, and my last forays into trick-or-treating
were in the San Fernando Valley’s suburban paradise of Lake View
Terrace. Those last years – 1969, 1970, 1971, and 1972 – saw the
addition to the trick or treater costume display of characters from
then-popular soap opera, Dark Shadows. Alas, the time had come for my
retirement from the trade.

Starting in the late 1960s, there began a determined campaign against
trick or treating, with dark urban legends of razor blades in apples
and hallucinogenic drugs in candies. Whether these ever actually
occurred is a matter of some dispute. Of course, if either happened
only once, one did not want one’s own child to be the lone example. In
many places the custom suffered a decline. But at various times it has
undergone a resurgence as well. Frankly, I find it typical of the
killjoyism of the present that children are deprived of the innocence
of childhood by the regime under which they live – and of the innocent
joys proper to that time by would-be Puritans.

Nevertheless, I do think that trick-or-treating can be improved, and
not just by dressing children as saints rather than monsters (I have no
objection to either, to be honest). It is to return the practise to
its original role of souling – albeit in an underground manner. When I
was still living in California, for decades I would include a short
note with each of bag of candy I gave out, asking for prayers for my
dead family and friends – in just those terms. As the years went by,
quite a number of returning children (and occasionally accompanying
parents) would assure me that they and their parents had done just that
and would again. If I had children of my own, before they (or I!) had
a touch of their haul, we would pray for the dead of those whom the
kids had visited.

In the struggle in which we are engaged, with the forces arrayed
against us being so powerful, we should not give the enemy an inch of
territory we can retain. Transforming Trick-or-Treating into souling
would make a merely innocent activity an occasion of both
evangelisation and catechesis, and a spiritual work of mercy – and yet
retain the pleasure involved. Moreover, it would return Halloween to
its proper roles as the first day of Hallowtide (as would keeping it as
a day of fast and abstinence). Uniting their faith with joy is an
important part of keeping children Catholic in the face of a world
whose satanic universalism is waiting to gobble them up. This last is
far more frightening than any Halloween costume, and for all that we
accept it as normal.

Charles A. Coulombe is a contributing editor for OnePeterFive. He is
the author of many books, including The Compleat Monarchist
, Blessed Charles of Austria: a Holy Emperor and His Legacy, as
well as Puritan’s Empire: A Catholic Perspective on American
History, Vicars of Christ: a History of the Popes, with A
Catholic Quest for the Holy Grail. His writings have appeared at the
Catholic Herald, Crisis, The European Conservative and he also has his
own podcast with Mr. Vincent Frankini.
