Paprocki ‘shocked’ by Durbin’s Chicago award

“This decision risks causing grave scandal,” Bishop Thomas Paprocki said.

The Pillar
Sep 20, 2025

An Illinois bishop said Friday that he is “shocked” by plans in the
Archdiocese of Chicago to honor Senator Dick Durbin, a longtime
supporter of legal protection for abortion.

Durbin, who is prohibited from receiving the Eucharist in his home
Diocese of Springfield, will be feted in November with a lifetime
achievement award by the Archdiocese of Chicago’s office of human
dignity and solidarity.
U.S. Senator Richard Durbin. Public domain.

While the award will be presented at a benefit presided over by
Chicago’s Cardinal Blase Cupich, Durbin’s own diocesan bishop — Bishop
Thomas Paprocki of Springfield — called the decision scandalous.

“I was shocked to learn that the Archdiocese of Chicago plans to honor
Senator Richard Durbin with a Lifetime Achievement Award,” Paprocki
said in a Sept. 19 statement given in response to questions from The
Pillar.

“Given Senator Durbin’s long and consistent record of supporting legal
abortion — including opposing legislation to protect children who
survive failed abortions - this decision risks causing grave scandal,
confusing the faithful about the Church’s unequivocal teaching on the
sanctity of human life,” Paprocki added.

“Honoring a public figure who has actively worked to expand and
entrench the right to end innocent human life in the womb undermines
the very concept of human dignity and solidarity that the award
purports to uphold,” the bishop said.

—
Durbin’s lifetime achievement award — to be conferred “for his work
with immigrants,” according to the Chicago archdiocese, will be given
at a Nov. 3 Chicago fundraiser presided over by Cupich, with
proceeds supporting both the Chicago archdiocese and a national network
of migration ministry efforts.

But for his part, Paprocki expressed concern that an award to Durbin
would violate Chicago’s own archdiocesan policy, which prohibits
“awards or honors” to “individuals or organizations whose public
position is in opposition to the fundamental moral principles of the
Catholic Church.”

To explain its policy, the archdiocesan policy manual notes that “Many
organizations and presenters that do ‘good work’ in some areas are
misguided in others, particularly in the areas of human life and
sexuality. In the past some honorees, speakers or organizations
presenting at gatherings for Catholic organizations have publicly
advocated viewpoints that are in opposition to the faith, causing
confusion and division within the Church.”

“Even if these individuals or organizations do not address these
specific topics of dissent at the facility or event, their appearance
is a source of scandal and confusion.”

Paprocki also noted a June 2004 statement from the U.S. Conference of
Catholic Bishops, which says that “Catholic institutions should not
honor those who act in defiance of our fundamental moral principles.
They should not be given awards, honors or platforms which would
suggest support for their actions.”

“The U.S. bishops have clearly taught that support for abortion
disqualifies individuals from receiving honors from Catholic
institutions,” Paprocki said Sept. 19.

In light of that, Paprocki said, the planned award for Durbin “sows
confusion about the seriousness of abortion and the integrity of
Catholic witness in public life. I urge Cardinal Cupich to reconsider
this action for the sake of clarity, unity, and fidelity to the Gospel
of Life,” he added.

—
In addition to his statement, Paprocki confirmed to The Pillar on
Friday that “Senator Durbin remains subject to the prohibition of canon
915 in the Springfield diocese.”

“He [has been] barred from receiving Holy Communion here in his home
diocese since 2004,” Paprocki noted, explaining that the decision began
with Durbin’s parish pastor, then-Msgr. Kevin Vann, was upheld first by
former Springfield Bishop George Lucas, and “later affirmed by me due
to Senator Durbin’s extensive and persistent record of voting for
abortion rights.”

“Although he has a place to stay in Chicago (like many Illinois
politicians), he maintains his domicile here in Springfield.”

Durbin, 80, has been a U.S. Senator since 1997 and was before that a
member of the U.S. House of Representatives.

While he initially supported restrictions on abortion, he became in the
U.S. Senate a supporter of Medicaid funding for abortion, and has
opposed the prospect of legal restrictions on the practice.

In 2007, the senator said that he personally opposes abortion, but
believes decisions about the practice must be made by a woman and her
doctor.

Paprocki, chair of the USCCB’s canonical affairs committee, has
commented previously on Durbin’s status in the Springfield diocese.

In a 2021 essay, the bishop wrote that “because his voting record
in support of abortion over many years constitutes ‘obstinate
persistence in manifest grave sin,’ the determination continues that
Sen. Durbin is not to be admitted to Holy Communion until he repents of
this sin. This provision is intended not to punish, but to bring about
a change of heart.”

“Sen. Durbin was pro-life when he started out in politics in central
Illinois. The denial of Holy Communion is a medicinal remedy that seeks
to foster a change of heart and encourage him to repent and return to
being pro-life,” Paprocki continued.

Paprocki’s essay on that subject came amid fractious debate among U.S.
bishops on the prospect of a document that might have addressed, among
other things, the question of whether Catholic politicians who support
abortion and other policies at odds with Catholic doctrine should
receive the Eucharist.

In May 2021, Cupich led an unsuccessful effort to postpone
discussion of that prospective document — which was eventually
published in November 2021 — because the bishops’ conference was then
meeting virtually amid the coronavirus pandemic.

—
In 2019, Paprocki issued a decree which prohibited two other Illinois
Catholics — Illinois House Speaker Mike Madigan and Illinois Senate
President John Cullerton — from receiving the Eucharist in the
Springfield diocese.

The bishop told The Pillar that decree came after years of
conversation, and was made with the hope it would occasion a deepened
commitment to the Catholic faith.

“The hope is that a person will in fact want to go to Holy Communion.
And then once they cease from being obstinately persistent in manifest
grave sin, they must be readmitted. And so that certainly is the hope —
that they would have that change of heart.”

“In my own conscience, I feel that if I did not properly enforce canon
915, I would be at least negligent, if not complicit, with those
Catholic politicians who are promoting abortion,” Paprocki said.

The Archdiocese of Chicago has not yet responded to a request for
comment on the planned award to Sen. Durbin.
