'A miracle': Girl welcomed home after being shot in head during Minneapolis church attack

Fri 24 Oct 2025 by Rachel Huston

A 12-year-old girl who was shot in the head during an attack on a
Minneapolis church in August has been released from hospital and
returned home.

Sophia Forchas was among the most seriously injured survivors of the
shooting at the Catholic Church of the Annunciation. On 27th August,
23-year-old Robin Westman began firing into the church, injuring 30
people and killing two children: eight-year-old Fletcher Merkel and
10-year-old Harper Moyski.

Westman died at the scene from self-inflicted wounds. Investigators say
he was “obsessed with the idea of killing children”.

During the attack, Forchas was shot in the head and a bullet became
lodged in her brain. She underwent major surgery, including the removal
of the left half of her skull, and at times doctors feared she would
not survive.

When she returned home on Thursday, she was greeted with cheers and
paraded around her town in a stretch limousine, according to the
Minneapolis Star Tribune.

Minneapolis Police Chief Brian O’Hara described her return as “nothing
short of a miracle”.

Her parents, Amy and Tom Forchas, said in a statement it was “one of
the most extraordinary days of our lives”.

Sophia will continue to need medical support for her speech and
mobility, but is making progress.

Twelve-year-old Lydia Kaiser, another victim of the shooting, had a
similar welcome home last week as she returned to school. A bullet
fragment lodged in her head while she was protecting a younger student,
and she has undergone surgery to relieve pressure.

Writing on a GoFundMe page set up for her, Lydia said: “It’s so hard to
believe I actually got shot, and other kids did too. It makes me angry
but I don’t want to let the shooter win. This is my last year at
Annunciation. I’ve been going there my whole life and it’s like my home
and my family.”

She also thanked people for their prayers.
