**Hundreds of UK churches fear closure by 2030, major survey warns**

Tue Oct 21 2025 by Tola Mbakwe

Hundreds of local churches across the UK could close within the next
five years, according to a major new survey published by the National
Churches Trust.

The 2025 National Churches Survey gathered responses from more than
3,500 churches across all major denominations.

It found rural churches were the least likely to have confidence that
they will remain open, with up to 7 per cent (900 churches) saying
they could close by 2030. Meanwhile, 2,000 churches said they will
"definitely" or "probably" not be used as a place of worship in five
years.

The report also revealed widespread issues with church buildings, with
many in poor or dangerous condition due to years of underfunding and
rising repair costs.

Nearly four in ten churches said they faced urgent work on roofs,
stonework, and heating systems. Financial pressures were also severe,
with a third admitting that their income no longer covers basic running
costs and some relying on reserves to stay afloat.

Despite the difficulties, most churches continue to play a vital
community role, hosting food banks, toddler groups, and mental health
support activities. Around 80 per cent still hold weekly services, with
42 per cent open daily to the public.

Sir Philip Rutnam, chair of the National Churches Trust, warned that
without urgent government and heritage sector support, the UK risks
losing “some of its most precious buildings and the lifelines they
provide to local communities”.

“Our churches stand as extraordinary witnesses to history: places where
beauty, belonging and service to the community have flourished for
centuries,” he said in a statement.

“The 2025 National Churches Survey sets out clearly the challenges that
churches are facing and also the opportunities for renewal, if we act
together.

”Without intervention the risks are enormous – we will lose more and
more of these buildings and all they embody - for good. To secure a
future for the UK’s historic churches, the UK Government, denominations
and heritage bodies must all recognise their leadership roles, act
together and act fast.”

Hugh Dennis , who supports the Trust’s work, said churches are vital to
the UK’s heritage and community life.

The actor, who stars as the Reverend Canon Chasuble in The Importance
of Being Earnest at the Noël Coward Theatre in London, said: “Churches
are a great British success story. They provide vital community support
such as food banks.

“They are custodians of priceless heritage – over 20,000 are listed for
their historical and architectural importance and they include many,
many treasures including stained glass, wall paintings, fonts and
memorials.

“And the vast majority still hold weekly religious services despite
falling numbers of clergy”.

The report was launched on Tuesday at the "Great
Expectations" conference at London’s Victoria and Albert Museum,
attended by church leaders, heritage experts, and public figures
including the Archbishop of York and HRH The Duke of Gloucester.

The Trust has called for a £50m annual capital funding scheme,
alongside long-term government support, to safeguard the country’s
38,500 church buildings for future generations.

Tola Mbakwe is a multimedia journalist for Premier.
