**General Audience, 15.10.2025**

*Cycle of Catechesis – Jubilee 2025. Jesus Christ our hope. IV. The
Resurrection of Christ and the challenges of today’s world. I. The
Risen One, living source of human hope (Jn. 10:7, 9-10).*

Dear brothers and sisters, good morning!

In the Jubilee Year catecheses, until now, we have retraced the life of
Jesus, following the Gospels, from his birth to his death and
resurrection. In so doing, our pilgrimage of hope has found is solid
foundation, its sure way. Now, in the last part of the journey, we will
allow the mystery of Christ, which culminates in the Resurrection, to
radiate its light of salvation in contact with the current human and
historical reality, with its questions and challenges.

Our lives are marked by countless events, full of different nuances and
experiences. At times we feel joyful, other times sad, other times
fulfilled or stressed, gratified or demotivated. We live busy lives, we
concentrate on achieving results, and we even attain lofty, prestigious
goals. Conversely, we remain suspended, precarious, awaiting success
and recognition that are delayed or do not arrive at all. In short, we
find ourselves experiencing a paradoxical situation: we would like to
be happy, and yet it is very difficult to be happy in a continuous way,
without any shadows. We come to terms with our limitations and, at the
same time, with the irrepressible urge to try to overcome them. We feel
deep down that we are always missing something.

In truth, we were not created for lack, but for fullness, to rejoice in
life, and life in abundance, according to Jesus’ expression in the
Gospel of John (cf. 10:10).

This deep desire in our hearts can find its ultimate answer not in
roles, not in power, not in having, but in the certainty that there is
someone who guarantees this constitutive impulse of our humanity; in
the awareness that this expectation will not be disappointed or
thwarted. This certainty coincides with hope. This does not mean
thinking in an optimistic way: often optimism lets us down, causing our
expectations to implode, whereas hope promises and fulfils.

Sisters and brothers, the Risen Jesus is the guarantee of this
deliverance! He is the wellspring that satisfies our thirst, the
infinite thirst for fullness that the Holy Spirit imbues into our
hearts. Indeed, the Resurrection of Christ is not a simple event of
human history, but the event that transformed it from within.

Let us think about a source of water. What are its characteristics? It
quenches thirst and refreshes creatures, irrigates the land, renders
fertile and living what would otherwise remain barren. It gives
refreshment to the weary traveller, offering him the joy of an oasis of
freshness. A wellspring appears as a freely-given gift for nature, for
creatures, for human beings. Without water it is not possible to live.

The Risen One is the living wellspring that does not dry up and does
not change. It always stays pure and ready for anyone who is thirsty.
And the more we taste the mystery of God, the more we are attracted to
it, without ever becoming completely satiated. Saint Augustine, in the
tenth Book of the Confessions, captures exactly this inexhaustible
longing of our hearts and expresses it in his famous Hymn to Beauty:
“You exhaled odours, and I drew in my breath and do pant after you. I
tasted, and do hunger and thirst. You touched me, and I burned for your
peace” (X, 27, 38).

Jesus, with his Resurrection, has guaranteed for us a permanent source
of life: he is the living one (cf. Rev 1:18), the lover of life, the
victor over all death. Therefore, he is able to offer us refreshment in
our earthly journey and assure us of perfect peace in eternity. Only
Jesus, who died and rose again, responds to the deepest questions of
our heart: is there really a destination for us? Does our existence
have any meaning? And the suffering of so many innocents, how can it be
redeemed?

The Risen Jesus does not bestow upon us an answer “from above”, but
becomes our companion on this often arduous, painful and mysterious
journey. Only He can fill our empty flask when our thirst becomes
unbearable.

And he is also the destination of our journey. Without his love, the
voyage of life would become wandering without a goal, a tragic mistake
with a missed destination. We are fragile creatures. Mistakes are part
of our humanity; it is the wound of sin that makes us fall, give up,
despair. To rise again instead means to get up and stand on our feet.
The Risen One guarantees our arrival, leading us home, where we are
awaited, loved, saved. To journey with him means to experience being
sustained despite everything, to have our thirst quenched and to be
refreshed in the hardships and struggles that, like heavy stones,
threaten to block or divert our history.

Dear friends, from Christ’s Resurrection springs the hope that gives us
a foretaste, despite the fatigue of living, of a deep and joyful calm:
that peace the only he can give us in the end, without end.

Greeting in English

I am happy to welcome this morning the English-speaking pilgrims and
visitors, especially those from England, Wales, Ireland, Malta, Norway,
Uganda, Australia, New Zealand, China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Taiwan, Canada, and the United States of America. With
prayerful good wishes that the present Jubilee of Hope may be for you
and your families a time of grace and spiritual renewal, I invoke upon
all of you the joy and the peace of Our Lord Jesus Christ.

Summary of the Holy Father's words

Dear brothers and sisters, in our continuing catechesis on the Jubilee
theme of “Jesus Christ our Hope,” today we consider how the
Resurrection of Jesus fulfills the desires of every human heart. Our
lives are marked by conflicting situations that reveal limitations and
our urge to overcome them. We seek worldly recognition and whether we
receive it or not, we still feel empty. This reveals that we are not
truly satisfied with achievements and passing certainties of this
world. This is because we are created in the image and likeness of God
and through the power of the Holy Spirit we recognize an inexhaustible
longing in our hearts for something more. It is only the resurrected
Jesus who can give the true and lasting peace that sustains and fills
us. In a world struggling with fatigue and despair, let us be signs of
hope, peace and joy in the Risen Lord.
