**Marxism Is the Opium of the Lost—Truth and Redemption Are Found Only in Christ**

*Scott Ventureyra | August 07, 2025 August 07, 2025*

*Originally published in Catholic Insight on August 7, 2025.*

In a world disoriented by false gospels and exhausted by ideological
extremes promulgated by delusional ideologues, the answer is not Marx.
The answer is not Che. The answer is only Christ, the Way, the Truth,
and the Life.

Recently, as I rarely do these days, I engaged in a social media
exchange in response to a post by a political commentator and
intellectual who goes by the name of Dorothy Lennon. That exchange
inspired this essay. Lennon, who, more often than not, provides pointed
and thoughtful critiques of oligarchic corruption, endless global wars,
and the troubling development of worldwide surveillance, shared a
widely circulated anecdote about Karl Marx’s personal poverty while
writing Capital: “A week ago I reached the pleasant point where I am
unable to go out for want of the coats I have in pawn, and can no
longer eat meat for want of credit.”

Even though I prefer to avoid online “debates,” because of their
futility and time consumption, I occasionally engage, simply because
throughout my life I have witnessed how planting seeds of truth can
come to have profound spiritual effects in people’s lives.

She mentioned this as a testament to Marx’s character, suggesting that
he was motivated not by fame or profit but by a sincere desire to
empower the working class and create a better world. But this kind of
narrative commits a common fallacy. It confuses personal hardship with
moral or philosophical virtue. Many destructive or even evil figures
have suffered for their ideas. For example, Adolf Hitler endured
imprisonment while writing Mein Kampf. Vladimir Lenin spent years
in exile before launching the Russian Revolution. Thus, suffering for
an ideology does not automatically vindicate it. The real question is
not whether Marx was sincere, but whether he was right.

Marx’s philosophy, though often disguised as concern for the poor, is
riddled with problems, both anthropological and economic. First, it
expounds a reductionist understanding of the human person. It reduces
human persons into pawns of class warfare, not in their proper nature
as moral agents created in the image of God. Second, it denies the
legitimacy and moral value of private property, failing to recognize
how properly ordered ownership cultivates responsibility, stewardship,
and social stability. Third, Marx portrays markets as systems of
exploitation rather than recognizing them as spaces for voluntary
exchange. Yet when grounded in ethical principles and guided by the
principle of subsidiarity, markets have the proven capacity to lift
entire populations out of poverty. Fourth, his economic theory depends
on the widely discredited labour theory of value. This theory neglects
to consider the significance of innovation, entrepreneurship, risk, and
consumer demand in shaping actual value and driving economic expansion.
Fifth, it replaces the decentralized knowledge and organic adaptability
of free, morally grounded markets with the rigid structures of
centralized planning, which has consistently led to stagnation,
scarcity, and systemic corruption. But most detrimental is that Marx’s
system severs the human being from his transcendent source. It denies
the spiritual dimension of human persons, offering not true liberation
but a hollow utopia that degrades souls, families, and societies.

Beneath the economic and political slogans lies a deeper pathology.
Marx’s philosophical system is grounded in scientific materialism,
class envy, and a categorical rejection of moral absolutes. Whether
deliberately or not, his work paved the way for some of the most brutal
regimes in modern history: Stalin’s gulags, Mao Zedong’s Great Leap
Forward, and the Khmer Rouge’s killing fields under Pol Pot.

Marxist ideology ultimately strips human beings of their inherent
dignity, denying the imago Dei, the image of God, and reducing the
person to a mere byproduct of class warfare. As Paul Kengor documents
in The Devil and Karl Marx, Marx’s writings and poetry reveal a
disturbing preoccupation with destruction, nihilism, and even Satanic
motifs. This spiritual dimension of Marx’s thought, so often
overlooked, casts a sinister light on the revolutionary fervour he
helped ignite.

In one of her posts of President Trump’s 2025 inauguration, Lennon
remarked on the visible unease among tech oligarchs such as Jeff Bezos,
Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, Sundar Pichai, and others
whose collective wealth exceeds $1.35 trillion when references to
God and Christ were made. That discomfort raises questions not only
about their worldview but also about the deeper spiritual currents that
underlie elite hostility to Christian truth. Many of these same elites
actively promote ideologies such as Marxism, transhumanism, or
hyper-materialism, which, like Marx’s own system, are antagonistic to
God, objective morality, and human dignity. In this light, it is
surprising, even given Lennon’s socialist sympathies, to see such
uncritical admiration for Marx, whose legacy is so deeply entangled
with both spiritual and political ruin.

While it is necessary to confront the real injustices of our time,
whether they come in the form of neoliberal economic exploitation,
predatory globalism, or the erosion of worker dignity by unaccountable
technocrats, we must be discerning about the solutions we embrace.
Exchanging one form of dehumanization for another is not moral progress
but moral regression. Quite distinctly, Christianity calls us to a
justice that is rooted in truth, ordered to love, and elevated by the
dignity of the human person made in the image of God. Marxism, by
contrast, offers a counterfeit salvation, one that demands vengeance
rather than reconciliation and thrives on resentment rather than grace.

Dorothy Lennon’s otherwise incisive political analysis often overlooks
the weaponization of Marxist ideology by oligarchs through media,
academia, and government. Instead of liberating the working class,
their aim is to divide and destabilize society for their personal
benefit. With the collapse of classical economic Marxism, its modern
reincarnation, often termed cultural Marxism, has flourished. The focus
of the struggle has now shifted from ‘class’ to a wide range of
identities, including race, sex, religion, and more. This ideological
shift has proven useful to globalist elites who exploit such
division to weaken national cohesion, erode religious and moral
foundations, and increase dependence on centralized institutions.

As a result, Marxism has become one of the most effective tools in the
oligarchs’ arsenal, not for empowering the oppressed but for managing
populations through confusion and control. As former KGB defector
Yuri Bezmenov warned, this form of ideological subversion is not a path
to justice but a strategy of demoralization, designed to fracture
societies from within and render populations easier to control.
As Michael Rectenwald and Rod Dreher have shown, Marxist
language has been absorbed by technocratic and corporate elites not to
dismantle power but to justify ever-expanding control. The great irony
is that while Marxism once claimed to fight elite domination, it now
serves as ideological cover for it. That this dynamic remains a major
lacuna in Lennon’s political and moral vision is both surprising and
revealing.

Che Guevara and the Death of Redemption

The conversation soon turned to Marx’s ideological descendant, Che
Guevara. To some, Che remains a symbol of resistance, romanticized as a
revolutionary hero. In my younger days, when pursuing undergraduate
studies, I, too, glorified Che Guevara’s cause. I also attached a false
affinity to him because of my Argentinian roots and Spanish heritage.
But as I learned more about him and history, I quickly rejected what he
embodied. This is particularly evident when examining some of his
statements. His words disclose a deep contempt for Christian love,
mercy, and self-sacrifice. In writing to his mother, he says:

“I am not Christ or a philanthropist, old lady. I am all the contrary
of a Christ. I fight for the things I believe in, with all the weapons
at my disposal and try to leave the other man dead so that I don’t get
nailed to a cross or any other place” (Letter to his mother, July 15,
1956, as quoted in Che Guevara: A Revolutionary Life by Jon Lee
Anderson, 1997).

Even more disturbingly: “In fact, if Christ himself stood in my way, I,
like Nietzsche, would not hesitate to squish him like a worm.” These
are not the words of a misunderstood idealist. They represent a
rejection of the Cross and a renunciation of the very heart of
Christian morality. For Che, freedom was inseparable from bloodshed,
not as a tragic cost but as a necessary engine of revolution. And yet,
as I noted in that same exchange, Che got the martyrdom he so bitterly
scorned. He died in a Bolivian jungle, executed and laid out for
display like a failed messiah. History has a way of exposing the
hollowness of its anti-saviours.

Revolution or Redemption?

This brings us to a more profound question. In the face of real-world
injustices, such as the plight of Palestinians or the concentration
of global power in the hands of unaccountable elites, what can truly
liberate the oppressed? Is it violent revolution or Christian
redemption?

Consider, for instance, Che’s tactics. Could they truly assist the
Palestinian cause today, a concern that features prominently in
Lennon’s writings? Israel’s heavy-handed military responses, including
disproportionate force and collective punishment, have undeniably
contributed to the suffering of Palestinians and inflamed tensions in
the region. Yet D-grade weapons against tanks and drones only invite
further death and despair, as seen in Hamas’s often self-defeating
assaults. Vengeance cannot build a just society; it only deepens wounds
and perpetuates hatred. In contrast, Christ offers a model of radical
transformation, not through retaliation, but through redemption; not
through domination, but through conversion. The Cross is not passive;
it confronts evil head-on while never succumbing to it. It is only
Christ who can break the cycle of bloodshed through the power of
sacrificial love.

The Historicity of Christ

At a certain point, the online “debate” shifted from politics to
ridicule of Christian belief. Some dismissed the Bible as “babble.”
Others denied that Jesus ever existed. One user even quoted, or rather
misquoted, the phrase “I am a man of one book,” attributing it to St.
Thomas Aquinas, in an attempt to mock Christian reliance on Scripture.
This exchange revealed not only a contempt for Christian faith but also
a broader ignorance of argumentation, logic, philosophy of religion,
and historical method, common among those who mistake mockery for
reasoned discourse.

But that quote, Homo unius libri timeo, “I fear the man of a single
book,” is frequently misunderstood and misattributed. It was
popularized by Bishop Jeremy Taylor, who noted Aquinas’s respect for
the mastery of one sole book or subject, and some have used it to
diminish his thought. However, Aquinas read broadly, engaging deeply
with Aristotle, Plato, Averroes, and Maimonides, among others, in
demonstrating that faith and reason are not enemies but allies in the
pursuit of truth.

Moreover, the denial of Jesus’s existence is not only unfounded. It is
intellectually dishonest. The historical evidence for Jesus of Nazareth
includes not only Christian writings but also multiple non-Christian
sources. Among them:

* Tacitus, the Roman historian, documented that Pontius Pilate
executed Christus, the founder of the Christian movement, during
the reign of Tiberius.

* Josephus, a first-century Jewish historian, referred to Jesus
in Antiquities of the Jews, where he noted His crucifixion and
reported resurrection.

* Suetonius noted that followers of “Chrestus,” likely referring
to Christ, caused disturbances among Jews in Rome.

* Pliny the Younger, a Roman governor, described Christians as
worshipping Christ “as a god” and refusing to offer sacrifices to
the emperor.

* Lucian of Samosata, a Greek satirist, ridiculed early
Christians for their devotion to a crucified man and their
readiness to sacrifice their lives for their convictions.

* Mara Bar-Serapion, a Syrian philosopher writing from prison,
referred to the execution of a “wise king” of the Jews.

* The Babylonian Talmud refers to “Yeshu” being “hanged” (a
euphemism for crucifixion) on the eve of Passover.

These sources, many of them skeptical or hostile to Christianity,
nevertheless confirm key historical facts: Jesus lived, taught,
gathered followers, and was crucified under Roman authority. To deny
this is not skepticism. It is historical amnesia.

I invited commentators and skeptics alike to read my article,
“Resurrecting Reason: A Rejoinder to Raphael Lataster on Miracles
and the Rationality of Theism,” which addresses many false claims about
the historicity of Jesus, the existence of God, and the rationality of
belief. It addresses the philosophical and historical evidence for
Jesus’ life, miracles, and resurrection and exposes the errors in
common atheist critiques of Christianity.

The True Opium

Karl Marx infamously claimed that “religion is the opium of the
people.” But history has shown otherwise. It is not Christianity that
sedates the soul and blinds people to reality. It is Marxism that has
become the opiate, numbing the minds of the godless, intoxicating
tenured academics, and addicting those who have forgotten history’s
warnings.

Marxism promises liberation but delivers tyranny. It replaces the
Kingdom of God with the tyranny of men. Its saints are executioners.
Its sacraments are blood and envy. Its heaven is an illusion.

Christianity, by contrast, is not a substance used to numb us from
reality, but rather it is like a fire that purifies us. It calls us to
self-denial, truth, and radical love. It does not pacify us but
profoundly transforms us.

In a world disoriented by false gospels and exhausted by ideological
extremes promulgated by delusional ideologues, the answer is not Marx.
The answer is not Che. The answer is only Christ, the Way, the Truth,
and the Life.
