**America’s Progressive Descent Into Psychosis**

Is there a cure for the civilization-ending woke mind virus?

Scott McKay October 22, 2025, 10:04 PM

I was all set to write a column weighing in on the [47]excellent Helen
Andrews piece at Compact about the feminization of our institutions and
the damage that’s done — though what I would say is that Alla Margolina
did an excellent job expounding on that subject in a post [48]we picked
up at RVIVR.

And then something else came up, which really deserves a bit of
treatment.

I’m going to preface this with a qualification, which is that I really
don’t want to make more of the “No Kings” rallies last weekend than
they deserve. Set against the ambitions of the Hard Left money machine,
which threw close to $300 million into what they hoped would be a
national groundswell of hatred toward President Trump and his
supporters, the “No Kings” multivenue pity-party for the “progressive”
movement was a terrible failure. It was a Tet Offensive without the
benefit of a mass-media Fifth Column in the United States to bootstrap
it into a victory. (RELATED: [49]The Left’s Top Dark Money Monster Is
Dying — and Taking the Democratic Party With It)

And as I said in one of our excellent [50]Spectacle Podcast segments
this week, I have every expectation that the net result of the “No
Kings” rallies and their putrid actual attendance (the organizers
claimed to have had some seven million demonstrators at 2,700 locations
around the country; the real number was maybe 10 percent of that) will
be that the Democrats on Capitol Hill will ultimately knuckle under and
stop filibustering the continuing resolution to reopen the government.

There had been a fairly widespread set of reports, perhaps best
described as rumors, but they had the ring of truth, that the Senate
Dems were hanging onto the filibuster in the hopes that the “No Kings”
rallies would shake the confidence of the Republicans and force them to
crater to Chuck Schumer’s crazy demands in an effort to reopen the
government. That has not happened, and there isn’t any real indication
that it will. If those reports were accurate, and “No Kings” was the
giant fizzle that it was, then one wonders where the Dems go from here,
other than to declare for living to fight another day, as John
Fetterman is exhorting them to do.

My theory hasn’t been proven true so far. There is this…

@WhipKClark, the number two House Democrat, on the Democrat
Shutdown: “Of course there will be families that are going to
suffer… but it is one of the few leverage times we have.”

…but I question how long that bravado will last.

So let’s agree that I’m not ringing alarm bells over the presence of
any great mass movement represented by “No Kings.”

But on the other hand, some of what was on display on Saturday does
need to be accurately described. [54]In Tuesday’s column, I talked
about the “old fart thinking,” namely, the insistence so many of the
aged protesters put on display that 20th-century consensus items and
styles be applied to nearly mid-21st-century problems and conditions.

But it wasn’t just the “old fart thinking” that was problematic. This
might not have been the most egregious example of the conduct the
country was subjected to before, during, and since last Saturday, but
it certainly appears to have been the best illustration of how far gone
so many of these people are.

That’s a sanitized version.

This is a little more descriptive version.

And this is how it ended…

A 61-year-old Fairhope, Alabama woman dressed as a penis and
carrying a “No Dick-tator” sign was arrested during Saturday’s “No
Kings” protest.

Video showing three officers pinning her down has since gone viral.

She was charged with resisting arrest and disorderly conduct.

If you missed it, the woman who thought it was a good and persuasive
idea to show up in an inflatable penis costume outside of an upscale
shopping mall on a sunny Saturday, where families were out enjoying the
weather, is… 61 years old. (RELATED: [58]Please Deliver Us From the
Poorly-Behaved Women)

Not some stupid college kid. A 61-year-old woman.

A friend of mine whose son was on the scene relates that Gamble was in
the street screaming obscenities at passing cars, and even jumped in
front of one driven by a brand new driver who nearly hit her, before
she was arrested.

Because her candidate didn’t win an election.

And the video of the arrest has gone viral because the screeching coven
of progressive hysterics across the country has decided that this is a
First Amendment violation of some kind — that the right to protest
involves dressing oneself up as a specimen of male genitalia in front
of unsuspecting citizens.

Bear in mind, these are the people who wanted to lock you up and take
your kids away for not wearing a face diaper or forcing your family to
take a COVID shot, but somehow they’re the defenders of the First
Amendment now.

Yes, this is an extreme case.

But it’s not an isolated case.

[59]MSNBC put the demented Robert De Niro on their air so that he could
declare that White House deputy chief of staff Stephen Miller was a
Nazi, and DeNiro then allowed that such a status would be unusual given
that Miller is Jewish. Nobody at that network batted an eye. Maybe
Miller’s inevitable lawsuit will change that, but the inherent
psychosis is no less substantive.

And this week, we’re seeing a large number of these people come
completely unglued over Trump’s having broken ground on construction of
a new ballroom facility at the White House, which will expand its
capacity for hosting events to 650 people, up from the current 200. The
project is being financed with $250 million in private donations, and
it will improve a part of the White House’s East Wing, which has stood
mostly useless since the Truman administration.

Both parties, assuming they can get someone elected president going
forward, will benefit from the expansion. And yet there are reactions
like these…

This image of the East Wing of the White House is a metaphor for
broader, reckless destruction.
The ballroom that will go up there will be a gaudy monument to
vanity, corruption and excess.
For anyone who has worked at the WH, or cares about its rich
history, it’s a gut punch. [60]pic.twitter.com/A7Kaa3fNOR

— David Axelrod (@davidaxelrod) [61]October 21, 2025

I genuinely think the images of them destroying the East Wing of the
White House could be a game changer in the elections.
[62]https://t.co/iyZ74N2zZE

— Neera Tanden🌻 (@neeratanden) [63]October 22, 2025

If a D is ever elected POTUS, razing the Trump ballroom and
restoring the White House to pre-Trump status is non-negotiable.

You have to tear down the physical manifestations of
authoritarianism.

— Jonathan V. Last ([65]@jvl.bsky.social) [66]Oct 20, 2025 at 5:28
PM

I’m putting this menagerie — which is grossly incomplete, by the way;
if I wanted to, I could regale the reader with easily a dozen other
current manifestations of utter unhinged lunacy taking place among
progressives, including those you’re supposed to believe are prominent
— in front of you for a reason.

And it’s something the vast majority of the people seeing this column
already know, but that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t be made clear again
and again.

There is palpable, complete mass psychosis on the Left in this country.
The idiocy on Saturday — which was supposed to persuade the American
people of the legitimacy of the progressive cause, let’s remember —
exposed it.

You have far too many people driven insane by progressive propaganda
and psychotropic drugs passed around like candy, divorced from family
and a higher power, who are in a narcissistic state and intoxicated by
a messianic political ideal built around a set of public policies that
have conclusively proven themselves ineffective.

They’re like lemmings marching to Jonestown, if you’ll forgive the
mixing of metaphors, despite the stench of the bodies and the Kool-Aid.

This has led to a psychotic break for hundreds of thousands, if not
millions, of them, and they can’t function in society anymore. Jeanna
Gamble can’t function in society. The compassionate thing to do with
her is to ensconce her in a rubber room.

And there are lots and lots of Jeanna Gambles out there.

I don’t know if it’s fixable.

You have to find a way to get them off politics, but they’ve allowed
politics to become their religion.

And there is no reasoning with them. Almost literally everything coming
out of their mouths is projection.

Virtually all of them voted for Joe Biden, but incessantly call Trump a
pedophile.

They were all for tearing down historical landmarks, but have lost
their minds over a renovation and expansion of the White House
ballroom.

They were the COVID Karens who ratted out their neighbors and demanded
lives be ruined over masks and shots, they lost their minds over a
protest at the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021 and insisted that people taking
selfies inside the Rotunda, who’d left their guns at home, were trying
to start a revolution, and now they think it’s their first amendment
right to wear pornographic costumes in public, throw rocks at cops and
burn down a Tesla dealership. And anyone who objects to this behavior
is a fascist.

I could write an entire column, and might, on the projection inherent
in the Graham Platner debacle.

Leftist media logic:

If a Republican cabinet official has Christian tattoos, he’s a white
supremacist.

But when a Democratic Senate candidate has a Nazi tattoo, it isn’t
newsworthy. [67]pic.twitter.com/ZztcswooEU

— MRC NewsBusters (@newsbusters) [68]October 22, 2025

It’s become easy for the Right to persuade the persuadable now, given
the competition. But do you think it’s possible to reason with Jeanna
Gamble? You can’t even keep her out of traffic.

This isn’t going to end well.

What’s going to happen is this crowd will cause so much trouble that
it’s going to require tactics which look to some like fascism (but are
actually simply law enforcement) to bring order and normalcy back to
society.

And the crazies of the Left like that idea, because as I’ve written, it
will make them victims, and they believe victimhood is the highest form
of human nobility.

[69]I’ve written that this is how civilization dies. Victimhood culture
destroys meritocracy, it destroys function, and it ultimately even
destroys empathy. The escape from this vicious cycle is to crush the
fake victims, because they will become the victimizers if given the
power to be, and then chaos will reign. (RELATED: [70]It’s Good v.
Evil. It’s Always Been Good v. Evil.)

So how do you crush them in nonviolent ways?

That, I don’t know. I have some ideas, but shaky confidence they’ll
work.

But no, we can’t allow 60-year-old women to show up and parade around
in public parks in inflatable penis costumes because they don’t like
the president, and we can’t have movie actors on television inciting
violence against the party in power.

And we can’t have the politically frustrated assassinating their fellow
citizens and attempting to murder the police for enforcing laws they
didn’t vote for.

This isn’t sustainable, and [71]it has to be acted upon. Nonviolently,
one hopes. But that includes bringing the full power of law enforcement
and the weight of the justice system to bear on the unhinged.

Which is going to have to happen.

And the full power of the American people, those of us not infected
with the woke mind virus, will have to descend on them at the ballot
box at every turn, so that those people left of center who can be
reasoned with will have some space to chase them back to the fringes
and clean up their movement.

We might be too far gone for that, I’ll admit. But that only means the
remedies will have to be dire.

This problem is a long time coming. It isn’t easily fixed. We have a
significant portion of our population that is lost to civilization, and
they will destroy it if they aren’t stopped.

So let’s stop it. Quickly, please. By the most civil means possible,
with the understanding that those means might not be so civil.
