**Why Are So Many Young Americans Killing Themselves?**

The spiritual roots of America’s suicide crisis.

by John Mac Ghlionn
October 17, 2025, 10:05 PM

Across the United States, suicide among young adults has soared
over the past decade. In places like Georgia, North Carolina, and
Texas, the rise has been staggering. The maps show the trend. But they
don’t capture the quiet despair behind it — the loneliness, the loss of
hope, the loss of meaning. This isn’t just a crisis of screens or
social media, but a crisis of the soul.

We live in an age of abundance, yet despair continues to spread like a
dark cloud. Gen Z has inherited everything — information, access,
entertainment — and still feels empty. They scroll, they compare, they
perform. They broadcast their lives for strangers but rarely live them.
It’s connection without communion, messaging without meaning, motion
without purpose. What’s missing isn’t dopamine but direction. (RELATED:
Is Suicide Selfish?)

Faith once gave that direction. It didn’t promise ease, only endurance.
It gave people something firm to stand on when everything else fell
apart. But belief today has been traded for irony. God is a punchline,
the church a museum, and the language of the soul has been replaced by
the language of self-help. In that silence, something essential has
gone missing — the quiet conviction that life, however hard, still
matters. (RELATED: The Church of Climate Panic)

A culture that prizes comfort over character can’t sustain the
weight of pain. When the soul starves, the mind soon follows.

The modern creed tells young people they can be anything. It rarely
tells them why they should be anything. They’re told to “find their
truth,” though truth itself has become a moving target. They’re told to
“love themselves,” though few are shown what love actually requires. So
they chase pleasure, mistaking it for peace. They crave attention and
confuse it with affection. And when both fade, they fall
apart. (RELATED: A Generation So Lonely, It Fell in Love With
Furniture)

Social media has accelerated the slide, but the roots go far deeper.
This is more of a spiritual famine than a technological failure. A
generation has grown up in a moral vacuum, where families fracture,
fathers fade, and faith is dismissed as a delusion for the naïve. A
culture that prizes comfort over character can’t sustain the weight of
pain. When the soul starves, the mind soon follows.

We’ve raised young people to see themselves as cosmic accidents —
clever animals with credit scores, born without purpose and destined
for oblivion. It’s little wonder so many view the future as a threat,
not an opportunity. Climate anxiety has become the creed of a
generation taught to fear its own existence. Greta Thunberg, an
infuriating figure I have discussed before, is now the mirror of
millions — irritable, impassioned, and neurotic to the point of
despair. Her trembling fury, once mistaken for courage, now feels like
a diagnosis. She embodies the anxiety that has metastasized through
millions of young minds convinced the world is ending before they’ve
even begun to live in it. The fear has grown so deep that many
twenty-somethings now see procreation not as an act of hope, but of
harm. A moral crime against the planet. (RELATED: Gaza Doesn’t Need
Greta. Greta Needs Gaza.)

We are watching the spiritual cost of teaching young people that doom
is destiny. Depression festers where faith once lived, and suicidal
ideation slips quietly into conversations about “sustainability.” When
pleasure fades, when happiness turns to dust, what remains? If
existence is only about the self, what’s left when the self can no
longer stand the sight of itself?

That’s the question echoing through bedrooms, dorm rooms, and hospital
wards across America. Young men and women who look fine on the surface
are quietly falling apart. They’re not seeking attention but escape.
Escape from the pressure to perform, to project, to pretend. They are
drowning in a culture that celebrates indulgence but sneers at
endurance, that preaches self-expression but erases self-restraint.

The answer won’t come from another hashtag campaign or mindfulness app.
It won’t come from self-care slogans or mental health influencers
preaching calm between brand deals. What’s needed isn’t another coping
strategy or preachy podcast, but a rediscovery of meaning. A return to
the idea that life is sacred. That pain can shape rather than shatter.
That hope is not a mood but a muscle.

At its best, faith — not the bible-thumping dogma, but genuine
spiritual belief — provides that meaning. It offers context. It tells
us that suffering isn’t senseless, that joy isn’t random, that every
life carries a spark of something worth saving. It reminds us that
peace isn’t found in endless novelty but in belonging — to family, to
community, to something transcendent in nature.

The task now is to help young people remember what the modern world has
beings. That their worth isn’t measured in likes or followers, but in
love given and received.

Renewal won’t come from Washington or Silicon Valley. It will come from
dinner tables where families talk instead of scroll. From friendships
unfiltered by screens. From communities that still value truth over
trend.

The rise in suicide is a reflection of a country that has lost its
compass. If despair is the disease of our time, hope must be the
antidote. But hope, like anything sacred, must be cultivated. It grows
where life is treated as a gift, not an inconvenience. The young are
not beyond saving. They are waiting — waiting to be shown that life,
even in its toughest moments, still has so much beauty.

Until we recover that truth — that life matters not because it is
perfect, but because it is precious — no chart, campaign, or clever
soundbite will reverse the tide. Because this crisis isn’t just
psychological. It’s profoundly human. It is the cry of a generation
that has everything — except a reason to live.
