**Thank God for Donald Trump**

*Jonathan Sacerdoti 14 October 2025, 5:00am*

Imagine, for a moment, the world we narrowly escaped. A world in which
Joe Biden, frail and fading, remained in the 2024 presidential race
and, with the exhausted assent of a compliant media and a protective
establishment, was returned to the White House. A world in which his
decisive televised collapse never quite happened or was quickly
obscured. In this alternate reality, Biden staggered through the
campaign and secured just enough ground to claim victory.

If the career diplomats sneered at the ‘real estate men’ entering
geopolitics, they may now see: sometimes, it takes builders to
rebuild the world

Had that happened, the consequences would have been severe, not just
for the United States, but for every corner of the world still
dependent on clarity, strength, and moral resolve. In the Middle East,
the results would have been nothing short of catastrophic.

Israel, reeling from the 7 October massacre, would have found itself
increasingly throttled. Biden’s second-term administration would have
cut or conditioned weapons shipments, stalled munitions resupply, and
imposed political red lines on Israeli military operations. The
unspoken but unmistakable goal: to constrain Israel’s war effort until
its strategic momentum was lost.

Biden would never have authorised ‘Midnight Hammer’, the joint
Israeli-American strike that dealt a devastating blow to Iran’s nuclear
programme. Iran would have crossed the nuclear threshold, arming it
with impunity and emboldening it in the face of Western restraint.
Hamas, sheltered by ceasefire diplomacy and propaganda lies, would have
been strengthened. The hostages would still be there. The Iranian axis
would have strengthened across Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen, with no fear
of reprisal.

Meanwhile, anti-Semitism in the United States would have escalated
further. University campuses would have become open-air theatres of
intimidation, unchallenged by the federal government. Jewish students
and families would have fled public institutions. Attacks would have
risen higher still. Jews would have begun to leave, not just
neighbourhoods, but the country.

In Europe, recognition of Palestine with no practical structure or
legal foundation would have gone totally unchallenged by the US. The
United Nations, rather than being exposed as the corrupt enabler of
violence it is, would have been restored to a position of international
moral authority.

And yet, none of that happened. Because Donald Trump returned.

What we saw on Monday when Trump appeared in the Knesset was an
American bear hug. Not symbolic. Not perfunctory. A full display of
power, solidarity, and unwavering alliance. America, the world’s
superpower, stood beside Israel, not as a distant observer, but as a
committed brother. The message to the region was unmistakable: the
United States is back, and it is standing proudly where it belongs.

The ripple effects are already visible. Qatar, long the host of Hamas
leadership and a quiet patron of regional ambiguity, is shifting.
Following the Israeli and American strikes on Iran, the calculation in
Doha changed. When Israeli jets hit Hamas assets on Qatari soil, they
did not act alone. The move bore the fingerprints of American approval,
and it signalled to the Gulf that the game had changed. Now Qatar is
moving, not out of moral clarity, but survival. They know which side is
winning, and it is not Iran. US and Israeli strength and tight
collaboration has shown them where their allegiances should lie.

After keeping 30 nations’ leaders waiting in Sharm el Sheikh while he
poured endless love and praise on Israel and Netanyahu, Donald Trump
arrived fashionably late for his own historic summit there. Arab states
came not to resist, but to listen. To be shown, politely but firmly,
what Trump and the United States expect, and what they will demand. A
moment of strategic instruction, backed not only by words but by
action. Even the delay sent a clear message: the President’s support
for Israel trumped all else. Let the world wait and watch it on full
display. The possibility now exists: that Hamas will wilt and
disappear, as it should. That the Palestinian movement will be forced,
finally, to reform – to abandon terror, rejectionism and
self-destruction, and to build something worthy of investment.

The Gulf states increasingly see Israel not as a liability, but as a
pillar. Their vision for a stable, modern, prosperous Middle East
depends on Israel’s integration. And if the Palestinians sabotage that
opportunity again – if they blow it up, literally and politically –
they will not be indulged. They will be sidelined yet again,

To imagine parallel histories can be fun, but frivolity is no answer to
complexity. And yet here, the contrast is useful. Because we very
nearly lived in the dark version of the world described above. We came
close.

It is only because of a handful of people, with vision, will, and
strategy, that we did not. Trump, Witkoff, Kushner, Netanyahu, Dermer:
men of realpolitik, not illusions. They understood the terrain, the
players, the stakes. They knew when to apply pressure, when to offer
deals, and when to show force. If the career diplomats sneered at the
‘real estate men’ entering geopolitics, they may now see: sometimes, it
takes builders to rebuild the world.

And that is the point. When a real estate dealmaker wants to sell you a
massive project before he’s even broken ground, he knows he must show
you something grand. He comes with computer generated renders and sells
you the dream. Only when you buy in can the building begin. And even if
the final product changes, the momentum is real, the deal is done, and
the project takes shape.

Designers dream. Developers persuade. And the world moves forward. That
is why this can work. It does not guarantee success, but it gives us
the chance. A far better version of history is unfolding today not by
accident, but by action. What happens next will require further
intelligence, resilience, and work.

Monday’s razzle dazzle showmanship, life changing reunifications and
heart-breaking redemptions might just be the most significant display
of technical diplomacy and wizardry I have known in my lifetime. On
Sunday, I thought it all quite mad, built on impossible dreams and
fantasies that could never be. But as the founder of modern Zionism,
Theodore Herzl, famously declared – if you will it, it is no dream.

*Jonathan Sacerdoti is a broadcaster and writer covering politics, culture and religion*
