**Promoting Campus Viewpoint Diversity: A Modest Proposal**

The highly progressive left-wing dominance on most college campuses has
turned off not only the Trump administration but large portions of the
American public whose financial support is critical to higher
education’s survival. Attempts to reform colleges from within have had
limited success. (RELATED: Can Artificial Intelligence Reduce the
Left-Wing Bias in University Classrooms?)

One such approach is to create new colleges, like the new University of
Austin. But that takes enormous amounts of money — amidst a declining
number of college-age individuals because of the birth dearth. Another
approach is to have a collegiate civil war, toppling the institution’s
governing board and firing overly woke administrators, which seemingly
worked at New College in Florida, but not many other places. A third
approach, creating traditional and more conservative-oriented civic
centers within universities, has met some limited success, but they
face continued resistance from the dominant campus power
structure. (RELATED: From the Top Down: The Erosion of Faith at
Georgetown University)

But there is an approach that would bring a fair amount of viewpoint
diversity at a low cost and probably even often only modest objection
from the campus leftish power structure: create a campus-wide debate
series using primarily outside speakers. (RELATED: How the
Classical Education Movement Is Rescuing a Lost Generation)

Let me give one possible model. Create an Athenian Dialogue: Debates
on Critical Issues of the Day.

Let me give one possible model. Create an Athenian Dialogue: Debates on
Critical Issues of the Day. Allocate $150,000 annually (barely the cost
of one tenured professor) for a series of four debates, two each
semester, with nationally recognized speakers. At each debate, a
well-known conservative-libertarian would debate a nationally
recognized liberal-progressive on a topic of current national interest,
each paid honoraria averaging perhaps $10,000 or $15,000. The
participants would typically formally debate for up to an hour,
followed by another 30 minutes of questions. (RELATED: Higher
Education’s Triple Crisis: Finances, Integrity, Leadership)

A baker’s dozen examples of debate topics: Should the U.S. have high
tariffs to promote domestic industry? Should the U.S. restrict fossil
fuel development on environmental and climate grounds? Should the U.S.
Department of Education be eliminated? Should the U.S. have a balanced
budget constitutional amendment that restricts federal deficit
spending? Should young people be required to do at least one year of
public service (military, Peace Corps, Teach for America, etc.)?

Should we allow large numbers of highly productive immigrants who are
willing to buy an expensive visa to become American workers and
ultimately citizens? Should federal health insurance be made available
at low or no cost to all Americans, financed by higher income and
wealth taxes on the affluent? Should the government fund
gender-affirming surgery? Should we legalize the use of marijuana and
cocaine, and lower the drinking age to 18?

Should primary and secondary students be given government-funded
vouchers towards tuition at the school of their choice, even
religiously affiliated ones? Should the United States leave NATO?
Should the U.S. support Taiwan in the event of an invasion by China? Is
the exclusion of consideration of race, gender, religion, and national
origin appropriate in hiring, admissions, and contracting decisions?

At small liberal arts colleges, in-person student attendance at the
debates could be made mandatory, sometimes using big buildings like
basketball gymnasiums. At larger schools, students should be encouraged
or enticed to attend, perhaps via computer. The Gates, Lumina, and Ford
Foundations could finance the debates at 100 schools each for probably
under $50 million total annually.

There are many possible variants on the idea. Have debates featuring
local students and faculty. Copy the tradition of the Oxford Union, now
in its third century. Mandate that all students participate in at least
one debate as a graduation requirement. Have politically oriented
student groups, such as the College Republicans or College Democrats,
jointly organize debates. Follow the Open to Debate series moderated by
John Donvan for tips. I have personally appeared in one such debate
(under the previous name Intelligence Squared) at Lincoln Center, and
at another at NYU, and found them both entertaining and informative.

To be sure, having a few debates a year on campus is typically not
going to dramatically change the campus culture for most students. But
it would increase, somewhat, academic viewpoint diversity at a
reasonable cost and with minimal battles with the woke bureaucracy.
Bringing in individuals of distinction from other locations reduces
campus provinciality and sometimes offers students new perspectives on
life on a smaller and less expensive scale than, for example, study
abroad programs. Let’s give it a try.

*Richard Vedder is a distinguished professor emeritus at Ohio
University, senior fellow at both the Independent Institute and Unleash
Prosperity, and author of Let Colleges Fail: The Power of Creative
Destruction in Higher Education.*
