**Word & Song by Anthony Esolen**

Hymn of the Week: Draw Me Nearer (I Am Thine, O Lord) by Fanny Crosby, 1875

Anthony Esolen Sep 16, 2025

I used to tell my students that for me one of the saddest moments in
the New Testament, though wonderfully understated, comes when Luke is
describing what it was like for his comrade Paul to speak to the
Athenians. Their days of glory, as you may know, were long past. Philip
of Macedon had subjugated them, then his son Alexander and his
successors, and now the Romans were in charge. The great philosophers
and dramatists had long returned to the dust. But they were a proud
people still, or maybe rather a vain people, since they knew that if
you were a Roman senator such as Cicero and you wanted your son Marcus
to get some schooling, you’d send him to Athens and hire him a teacher.
So Paul climbs up the steep path to a place called the Hill of Ares —
which you might know as the Areopagus, or, changing the name of the
war-god, Mars Hill. It is an immense and rather eerie outcrop of
volcanic rock, bowl-shaped on one side and thus ideal for public
speakers. Six centuries before, it had been the chief site for the
Athenian governing council. When democracy swept the city, it became
the principal court of law, though gradually its authority had been
restricted. By the time Paul arrived, it was like the famous Speaker’s
Corner in Hyde Park, in London, except that, seeing how glorious Athens
had once been, it was but a shadow, an echo. Yet the clever and the
curious used to hang around the place. “For all the Athenians and
strangers which were there,” says Luke, “spent there time in nothing
else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.”
When people have lost their hold on immemorial truth, they seek
novelty. How seriously they seek it is another matter. And there, at
what once was the heart of Athenian political life, in the city that
prided itself on teaching the world that had conquered it, Saint Paul
preached the God “in whom we live, and move, and have our being,” the
God the Athenians were unwittingly in search of. Luke does not, in that
particular speech, mention the Cross, but it is implied when he says
that God has raised the man ordained to judge the world — raised him
from the dead. We may think of what he wrote to those other Greeks,
those in Corinth, more mercantile and hedonistic than the Athenians,
that “the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, but we
preach Christ crucified, a stumbling stone to the Jews, and folly to
the Greeks.” Yet as I write these words, I glance up at a crucifix on
the wall, and a lovely plaque given us by a dear Baptist friend of
ours, the good Revered Walter Lawrence, now returned to the Lord. It
reads, “Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life.”

Our Word of the Week is reason, and I think sometimes we can
divide the world or even our own hearts into two camps. I’ll put it as
one of my heroes, Malcolm Muggeridge, put it, some years before he gave
over his atheism and came to Christ in full, whom I believe he had
always loved. He imagines a place called the Cafe Limbo. On one side,
you have bright lights and a lot of noise and publicity. On the other
side, darkness, and faint “sounds and sweet airs.” The first is called
Legend. That’s where all the “important” work in the world gets done.
The second is called Life. “In Life there is suffering, deprivation and
sanity,” says Muggeride; “in the Legend, happiness, abundance and
madness.” The Cross is really a cross, as it turns out: a crossroads,
or a crossing against what we think we want, to embrace what we do want
and need. The Cross is a gift; it is the key that turns the lock. And
the natural man in us cries out, “That’s not reasonable!” But yes, it
is. I’ve lived a long time in this world and seen much, and I can say
that, in the ultimate turn of divine irony, the Cross is the only thing
that does make sense.

The author of our Hymn of the Week, Fanny Crosby (and yes, Bing
Crosby was a relation), may as well have been born blind. She lost her
sight when she was but six weeks old, though it seems that some slight
shading of light could strike her eyes. The three main characteristics
of her hymns — she wrote thousands, many of them under one of her 200
noms de plume, because she didn’t want to seem to be hogging things,
nor did she court the attention — are sweetness, simplicity, and an
embrace of the Cross. She led a happy and full life; her husband,
Alexander van Alstyne, was a musician, and he too was blind. She could
play the piano and the guitar, and in fact she sometimes composed the
melodies for the hymns she wrote. I doubt that you could find, in
nineteenth century America, a more tireless woman than she was, in her
charity work, and in her advocacy for various social causes. She lived
to the ripe age of 94. But aside from the noise, and there would be a
good deal of it wherever she went, she was most herself in the quiet
hours when she drew near and always nearer to the Cross. There is no
self-pity in her; it is all childlike trust and love.

::

    I am thine, O Lord, I have heard thy voice,
    And it told thy love to me;
    But I long to rise in the arms of faith
    And be closer drawn to Thee.

    Refrain. Draw me nearer, nearer blessed Lord,
    To the Cross where Thou hast died;
    Draw me nearer, nearer, nearer, blessed Lord,
    To thy precious, bleeding side.

    Consecrate me now to thy service, Lord,
    By the power of grace divine;
    Let my soul look up with a steadfast hope
    And my will be lost in Thine. Refrain.

    Oh, the pure delight of a single hour
    That before Thy throne I spend,
    When I kneel in prayer, and with Thee, my God,
    I commune as friend with friend. Refrain.

    There are depths of love that I cannot know
    Till I cross the narrow sea;
    There are heights of joy that I may not reach
    Till I rest in peace with Thee. Refrain.

*Word & Song by Anthony Esolen is an online magazine devoted to
reclaiming the good, the beautiful, and the true. We publish six essays
each week, on words, classic hymn, poems, films, and popular songs, as
well a weekly podcast, alternately Poetry Aloud or Anthony
Esolen Speaks. To support this project, please join us as a free or
paid subscriber.*
