**King Charles’ Vatican visit may have done more to repair ecumenical relations than anyone could have imagined**

October 31, 2025 tcnadmin

When King Charles III and Pope Francis prayed together in the Sistine
Chapel last week it was a particularly significant and historic moment,
but the visit took place in something less than the best of
circumstances. The result of months of careful diplomatic planning,
after many years of increasing closeness between the Vatican the
British monarchy, there was an understandable frustration from within
the Palace that the importance of the king’s diplomatic efforts were
being overshadowed by public anger and increasing political pressures
relating to his younger sibling, Prince Andrew.

It was a great shame that the media and public focus remained
resolutely on Andrew, his living situation, his continued use of royal
titles and unresolved questions about his past associations. The
posthumous publication last week of the memoir Nobody’s Girl, by
Virginia Roberts Giuffre, served to further enflame the already
widespread mood of concern and anger at Prince Andrew’s actions
following her allegations that she was forced to have sex with the
prince, aged 17. Ms Giuffre, who committed suicide at her farm in
Australia in April, aged 41, left details in her memoir that added a
whole new layer of outrage to her encounters with Prince Andrew, and
deepened the public suspicion that the prince had been far less than
honest about his involvement with her, and the Jeffrey Epstein circle
in general (though Prince Andrew has always continued to deny
vigorously the accusations against him).

With this bombshell book and its new revelations dominating the
headlines, the historically important and much-anticipated meeting
between King Charles and Pope Leo took on a distinctly pained air; as
the king shook hands with Leo he quipped wearily that the intruding
cameras were a “constant hazard,” to which the Pope replied dryly “You
get used to it.”

If the motives of the media were primarily to capture the deeply
furrowed brow of the monarch, it was harder to avoid the splendour and
history of this occasion, and where symbolism spilled out of every
crevice. The moment of joint prayer in the Sistine chapel may have been
the definitive picture, but it was the visit to the Basilica of St Paul
Outside the Walls that had the most historic meaning. Here lay the tomb
of St Paul of Tarsus, the apostle of Christ who defines the very roots
of our common Christianity. In this moment the old enmities became
quite meaningless. The basilica as you see it today dates from only
1823, but there was church here as far back as at least AD324. Records
also show an ancient connection between this church and the English
monarchy – the Saxon kings Offa and Æthelwulf were known to have
contributed to the upkeep of the church and, prior to the Reformation,
the English monarchy were protectors of the church, as evidenced by the
basilica’s coat of arms which features the insignia of the Order of the
Garter, the highest order of chivalry in England.

Perhaps the notion of chivalry – or rather the defamation of it by his
sibling – was on King Charles’ mind as he stood to reflect by the tomb
of St Paul. Membership of the Order of the Garter was one of the first
titles stripped from Prince Andrew earlier this month at the same time
as he lost his title the Duke of York, following what the palace
described as “discussion with the King.”.

It had been hoped by some that stripping the Prince of some of his
titles might have helped assuage public outrage, but the wise knew that
it wouldn’t be anything like enough to pacify the public and political
mood. Thus yesterday Buckingham Palace was forced to make the seismic
announcement that Andrew will also lose his prince title, and will also
be forced to leave his Royal Lodge home in Windsor, the rambling
mansion that he has clung to, has also become the subject of serious
questions about where the money to fund its rent and upkeep is coming
from.

The statement read in full:

::

  His Majesty has today initiated a formal process to remove the style,
  titles and honours of Prince Andrew.

  Prince Andrew will now be known as Andrew Mountbatten Windsor.

  His lease on Royal Lodge has, to date, provided him with legal
  protection to continue in residence.

  Formal notice has now been served to surrender the lease and he will
  move to alternative private accommodation.

  These censures are deemed necessary, notwithstanding the fact that he
  continues to deny the allegations against him.

  Their Majesties wish to make clear that their thoughts and utmost
  sympathies have been, and will remain with, the victims and survivors
  of any and all forms of abuse.

  Whilst it may seem particularly harsh to humiliate and disown your
  brother so publicly, the sad truth is that the King had little
  alternative – the reputation and future survival of an already battered
  monarchy is at stake and, as head of that institution, family bonds
  have to take second place.

The final paragraph is particularly bold and represents a profound
shift in the traditional distanced relationship between the monarchy
and its public; in all the years that the allegations against Andrew
have rumbled on this is the first time that the royal family has
empathised with the victims in this story, and it’s a whole lot more
than Andrew ever uttered in his notorious Newsnight interview. This
shift of emphasis should not be underestimated in an institution that
could almost be defined by its poor treatment of women, stretching
right back to Henry VIII – whose ruthless treatment of his six wives is
an intrinsic part of British culture and education, without the
slightest engagement with questions of violence against women, misogyny
and male entitlement.

It is expected that the title of Duke of York may well die with Andrew
Mountbatten Windsor; it’s a title of the nobility in the peerage of the
United Kingdom that since the 15th century has been traditionally
bestowed on the second son of the king. With two daughters and no son,
there isn’t an obvious inheritor of Andrew’s title. The last Catholic
monarch to hold the title, and also the last Catholic monarch of
England, was James II, who was bestowed as Duke of York at his birth
whilst his brother Charles II was the monarch. On his deathbed on 16th
February 1685 it is said that Charles II was received into the Catholic
Church by the Benedictine monk Fr John Huddleston, though at the time
he was drifting in and out of consciousness and seemed far more
preoccupied with the fate of his many mistresses: “Be well to
Portsmouth, and let not poor Nelly starve,’ he is famously supposed to
have said to his young son James, who was about to become king.

Sadly, James merely continued the same sense of monarchical male
entitlement, secretly marrying a commoner Anne Hyde (the daughter of
his chief minister, Edward Hyde) against everyone’s advice, and then
installing a number of mistresses for himself. One commentator
described him as “the most unguarded ogler of his time and the great
diarist Samuel Pepys even recorded in his diary that James “did eye my
wife mightily”.

Anne – a devout Catholic – was by all accounts a devoted wife and when
she died in 1671 James eventually met and married Maria Beatrice
Eleonora Anna Margherita Isabella d’Est, more commonly known as Mary of
Modena, a fifteen-year-old Italian princess from the Duchy of Modena in
north western Italy. James and Mary were married by proxy in a Catholic
ceremony on 20 September 1673. On 21 November Mary arrived in England
and Nathaniel Crew, Bishop of Oxford, performed a brief Anglican
service that did little more than recognise the marriage by proxy.

James and Mary remained devoutly Catholic, with James once remarking,
“If occasion were, I hope God would give me his grace to suffer death
for the true Catholic religion as well as banishment.” Mary struggled
to conceive a child, and the couple went to Bath, where they bathed in
the city’s spa waters to no avail. However, after they subsequently
visited St. Winefride’s Well and Shrine in Holywell, north Wales in
1686 Mary conceived and gave birth to a son, James Francis Edward
Stuart, in recognition of which she donated the immense sum of £30 to
the restoration of the buildings at St Winefride’s shrine which were in
a perilous state at the time.

James was Prince of Wales and heir until his Catholic father was
deposed and exiled in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. James’ son, the
magnificently named Henry Benedict Thomas Edward Maria Clement Francis
Xavier Stuart, was born in exile in the Palazzo Muti in Rome on 16th
March 1725 and On 30 June 1747 Pope Benedict XIV conferred the tonsure
on him and created him Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Campitelli in
a special consistory held on 3 July 1747. Henry also became known as
Henry IX and I of England but the Papacy did not recognise Henry as the
lawful ruler of Great Britain and Ireland, and instead referred to him
as the “Cardinal Duke of York”, or just “The Duke of York”.

If you visit St Peter’s basilica in Rome today you can see the Monument
to the Royal Stuarts, which commemorates the last three members of the
Royal House of Stuart: James Francis Edward Stuart (“the Old
Pretender”, d. 1766), his elder son Charles Edward Stuart (“the Young
Pretender” or “Bonnie Prince Charlie”, d. 1788), and his younger son,
Henry Benedict Stuart (“the Cardinal Duke of York”, d. 1807). The
inscription is supported by two weeping angels symbolising the lost
hopes of the exiled Stuarts, and to this day the monument is frequently
adorned with flowers left by Catholic Jacobite romantics.

For most Catholics, the actions of King Henry VIII created a split in
English Christianity that has proved profoundly difficult to heal. The
reality is that mutual understandings between English Catholic and
Protestant traditions have survived and flourished over the centuries
since the Glorious Revolution and the Reformation drove us apart, based
on our common understanding of the gospel message and the teaching of
the apostles. On his visit to the Vatican last week King Charles may
have been upset by the rumblings surrounding his brother, but the
difficult and decisive actions taken on his return may have done far
more to repair the damage left by the Reformation than even the King
himself could have imagined.

*Joseph Kelly is a catholic writer and public theologian*
