King Charles III was formally accorded the title of Royal Confrater
during a solemn ecumenical ceremony at the Basilica of Saint Paul
Outside the Walls in Rome.

The presentation took place on 2 October during the occasion of his
state visit, accompanied by Queen Camilla, to the Holy See, which was
attended by senior Catholic and Anglican figures.

The title of Royal Confrater, conferred with the approval of Pope Leo
XIV, historically belonged to Catholic monarchs who served as honorary
protectors of one of Rome’s major basilicas.

The notion of "Confraternity" being bestowed on King Charles – and
thereby on the Protestant British Crown – by the Vatican serves as a
recognition of spiritual fellowship. The revival of the title in this
context also signals a delicate but real shift in Anglican-Roman
Catholic relations, according to commentators.

For centuries, the English monarch has served as Supreme Governor of
the Church of England, embracing a firmly Protestant identity at the
Coronation. Thus the king’s acceptance of a Catholic title attached to
a papal basilica, even if symbolic, is a significant ecumenical act in
the history of the Anglican and Catholic Churches.

The King and Queen, accompanied by Cardinal James Michael Harvey,
Archpriest of the Basilica, and by Abbot Donato Ogliari, Abbot of Saint
Paul's Outside walls, entered the church through its Holy Door before
proceeding to the tomb of the Apostle Paul, where they paused in
prayer.

The ecumenical liturgy that followed was attended by senior Anglican
and Reformed figures, including the Archbishop of York, Stephen
Cottrell, and the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, Rosie Frew.

The music, a blend of Anglican and Roman traditions, included “Hosanna
to the Son of David” by Orlando Gibbons and “Sing Joyfully” by William
Byrd, performed jointly by the choirs of St George’s Chapel, Windsor;
St James’s Royal Chapel and the Schola of the Abbey.

During the service, readings from the Letter to the Ephesians and the
Gospel of John were proclaimed, reflecting the theme of Christian unity
that was inscribed upon the King’s stall – which was made especially
for the event – with the Latin words, Ut unum sint (“That they may be
one”).

Abbot Ogliari then read the formal declaration of confraternity,
invoking the “common ecumenical journey” and “fraternal task” shared
between the Churches. Moderator Rosie Frew, participating alongside,
reaffirmed the shared Christian calling to unity “in the darkness of
our time”.

The King looked visibly moved as he was made Royal Confrater,
reports the Daily Telegraph.

Cardinal Harvey told the small congregation gathered for the ceremony
that the “significance of this visit today cannot be overestimated”,
adding that the Churches of England and Rome had moved from “mutual
incomprehension and suspicion” to a relationship that has become
“deeper and warmer”.

Speaking directly to the King, sitting in the specially made stall, the
cardinal said: “Your presence is historic by any measure or
calculation," before going on to say that it marked the start of a
“soul-stirring new chapter”.

The ceremony at the Basilica brought a two-day royal visit to a close,
following engagements that included meetings with Pope Leo XIV and
senior Vatican officials, as well as joint Anglican-Catholic prayers in
the Sistine Chapel. The King and Queen later visited the adjoining
monastery and library before departing Rome.

Reporting from the Vatican, BBC royal correspondent Sean Coughlan
described the event as "a symbolic moment of joining up the dots of
history”.

He explained, in regard to Catholicism: “Before the Reformation, this
was once a Church with a particular connection to the English monarchy,
back to the Saxons."

Photo: King Charles III sits in a specially created seat, displaying
his Coat of Arms and a Latin inscription, in honour of becoming Royal
Confrater of the Abbey, during his state visit to the Holy See, Rome,
Italy, 23 October 2025 (Photo by Aaron Chown- Pool/Getty Images)

‍

King Charles III was formally accorded the title of Royal Confrater
during a solemn ecumenical ceremony at the Basilica of Saint Paul
Outside the Walls in Rome.

The presentation took place on 2 October during the occasion of his
state visit, accompanied by Queen Camilla, to the Holy See, which was
attended by senior Catholic and Anglican figures.

The title of Royal Confrater, conferred with the approval of Pope Leo
XIV, historically belonged to Catholic monarchs who served as honorary
protectors of one of Rome’s major basilicas.

The notion of "Confraternity" being bestowed on King Charles – and
thereby on the Protestant British Crown – by the Vatican serves as a
recognition of spiritual fellowship. The revival of the title in this
context also signals a delicate but real shift in Anglican-Roman
Catholic relations, according to commentators.

For centuries, the English monarch has served as Supreme Governor of
the Church of England, embracing a firmly Protestant identity at the
Coronation. Thus the king’s acceptance of a Catholic title attached to
a papal basilica, even if symbolic, is a significant ecumenical act in
the history of the Anglican and Catholic Churches.

The King and Queen, accompanied by Cardinal James Michael Harvey,
Archpriest of the Basilica, and by Abbot Donato Ogliari, Abbot of Saint
Paul's Outside walls, entered the church through its Holy Door before
proceeding to the tomb of the Apostle Paul, where they paused in
prayer.

The ecumenical liturgy that followed was attended by senior Anglican
and Reformed figures, including the Archbishop of York, Stephen
Cottrell, and the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, Rosie Frew.

The music, a blend of Anglican and Roman traditions, included “Hosanna
to the Son of David” by Orlando Gibbons and “Sing Joyfully” by William
Byrd, performed jointly by the choirs of St George’s Chapel, Windsor;
St James’s Royal Chapel and the Schola of the Abbey.

During the service, readings from the Letter to the Ephesians and the
Gospel of John were proclaimed, reflecting the theme of Christian unity
that was inscribed upon the King’s stall – which was made especially
for the event – with the Latin words, Ut unum sint (“That they may be
one”).

Abbot Ogliari then read the formal declaration of confraternity,
invoking the “common ecumenical journey” and “fraternal task” shared
between the Churches. Moderator Rosie Frew, participating alongside,
reaffirmed the shared Christian calling to unity “in the darkness of
our time”.

The King looked visibly moved as he was made Royal Confrater,
reports the Daily Telegraph.

Cardinal Harvey told the small congregation gathered for the ceremony
that the “significance of this visit today cannot be overestimated”,
adding that the Churches of England and Rome had moved from “mutual
incomprehension and suspicion” to a relationship that has become
“deeper and warmer”.

Speaking directly to the King, sitting in the specially made stall, the
cardinal said: “Your presence is historic by any measure or
calculation," before going on to say that it marked the start of a
“soul-stirring new chapter”.

The ceremony at the Basilica brought a two-day royal visit to a close,
following engagements that included meetings with Pope Leo XIV and
senior Vatican officials, as well as joint Anglican-Catholic prayers in
the Sistine Chapel. The King and Queen later visited the adjoining
monastery and library before departing Rome.

Reporting from the Vatican, BBC royal correspondent Sean Coughlan
described the event as "a symbolic moment of joining up the dots of
history”.

He explained, in regard to Catholicism: “Before the Reformation, this
was once a Church with a particular connection to the English monarchy,
back to the Saxons."
