**Tucker Carlson calls Christian Zionism a “heresy”**

Niwa Limbu

Former Fox News host Tucker Carlson has stated that Christian Zionism
is a “Christian heresy” in an interview with controversial political
commentator Nick Fuentes on his show this week.

In the two-hour-long conversation, posted to Carlson’s platform on his
social media profile, the pair lambasted “Christian Zionists”, using
stark language to denounce American conservatives who ardently support
Israel.

Carlson, an Episcopalian Christian, said he “dislike[s] them more than
anybody” and blasted the phenomenon as a “Christian heresy” that
offends him as a believer. He questioned why figures such as Mike
Huckabee, Ted Cruz, John Bolton and other non-Jewish Republicans seem
“seized by this brain virus” of unswerving Zionism.

“Christian Zionists – like what is that? … I dislike them more than
anybody, you know, because it’s Christian heresy and I’m offended by
that as a Christian,” Carlson declared in the interview.

He added that he has been “pissed at the neocons [Neoconservatives]”
driving U.S. foreign policy “since December of 2003”, after witnessing
the Iraq War’s fallout, and argued that some Republican politicians act
as if they are “serving Israel” rather than their own country.

Fuentes agreed with Carlson’s critiques of pro-Israel conservatives
while voicing his own hard-line views. The 27-year-old Fuentes, who has
a long history of antisemitic commentary, claimed that “neoconservatism
arises from Jewish leftists who are mugged by reality when they saw the
surprise attack during the Yom Kippur War”.

He asserted that neoconservative ideology is fundamentally tied to
hawkish support for Israel. Throughout the discussion, Fuentes echoed
familiar themes from his “America First” platform, accusing “dual
citizens” and pro-Israel lobbyists of holding undue influence in
Washington.

The tone of the interview was notably cordial, as it served to publicly
mend a rift between Carlson and Fuentes. The two had been trading barbs
for months prior to this meeting, in a feud largely waged through
social media and podcasts.

At one point, Carlson suggested that Fuentes was a federal agent
running a “psyop” against conservatives, while Fuentes shot back by
accusing Carlson of being the real “secret federal agent” in disguise.

Carlson acknowledged those insults and offered an apology on air for
the personal attack, and the pair laughed about their past paranoia.
They “buried the hatchet” over the “fed” accusations and found common
ground in their shared resentment of establishment Republicans.

Fuentes’s appearance on Carlson’s show has drawn widespread
condemnation. “How could Tucker interview one of the most genuinely
hateful racists and Jew-haters in the world, Nick Fuentes? Honestly, I
am shocked by that. Despicable,” wrote Christian author Eric Metaxas on
X.

Conservative commentator Dinesh D’Souza likened Carlson to a loyal dog
who “is friendly to guys like Nick Fuentes and hostile to guys like Ted
Cruz”.

The Catholic Church has historically not endorsed Zionism. Saint Pope
Pius X’s 1904 audience with Theodor Herzl highlighted this early
opposition: the pope emphasised that while Jews could freely settle in
Jerusalem, the Church could not condone a solely Jewish state.

Subsequent Vatican diplomacy maintained this view, particularly during
and after World War II, when plans for a Jewish homeland gained
international momentum. The Vatican were cautious about
Jewish-dominated Palestine that could disrupt Christian custodianship
of sacred sites.

After 1948, the Catholic position began to evolve from outright
theological rejection towards cautious political accommodation. Pope
Pius XII resisted American entreaties to recognise Israel, seeing such
recognition as premature and inconsistent with the Church’s universal
mission. Yet under Pope John XXIII, who sought reconciliation with the
Jewish people, a more open tone emerged that would culminate decades
later in formal diplomatic recognition.

The 1993 Vatican–Israel accord marked a pragmatic acknowledgment of
political reality rather than a theological endorsement of Zionism,
while subsequent agreements with the Palestine Liberation Organization
reflected the Holy See’s enduring commitment to peace and justice for
both peoples.

In 2015, Pope Francis reaffirmed this dual recognition, calling for
coexistence between two sovereign states, though some within the
Vatican now question whether a one-state model might better embody
Christian principles of equality and reconciliation.

Former Fox News host Tucker Carlson has stated that Christian Zionism
is a “Christian heresy” in an interview with controversial political
commentator Nick Fuentes on his show this week.

In the two-hour-long conversation, posted to Carlson’s platform on his
social media profile, the pair lambasted “Christian Zionists”, using
stark language to denounce American conservatives who ardently support
Israel.

Carlson, an Episcopalian Christian, said he “dislike[s] them more than
anybody” and blasted the phenomenon as a “Christian heresy” that
offends him as a believer. He questioned why figures such as Mike
Huckabee, Ted Cruz, John Bolton and other non-Jewish Republicans seem
“seized by this brain virus” of unswerving Zionism.

“Christian Zionists – like what is that? … I dislike them more than
anybody, you know, because it’s Christian heresy and I’m offended by
that as a Christian,” Carlson declared in the interview.

He added that he has been “pissed at the neocons [Neoconservatives]”
driving U.S. foreign policy “since December of 2003”, after witnessing
the Iraq War’s fallout, and argued that some Republican politicians act
as if they are “serving Israel” rather than their own country.

Fuentes agreed with Carlson’s critiques of pro-Israel conservatives
while voicing his own hard-line views. The 27-year-old Fuentes, who has
a long history of antisemitic commentary, claimed that “neoconservatism
arises from Jewish leftists who are mugged by reality when they saw the
surprise attack during the Yom Kippur War”.

He asserted that neoconservative ideology is fundamentally tied to
hawkish support for Israel. Throughout the discussion, Fuentes echoed
familiar themes from his “America First” platform, accusing “dual
citizens” and pro-Israel lobbyists of holding undue influence in
Washington.

The tone of the interview was notably cordial, as it served to publicly
mend a rift between Carlson and Fuentes. The two had been trading barbs
for months prior to this meeting, in a feud largely waged through
social media and podcasts.

At one point, Carlson suggested that Fuentes was a federal agent
running a “psyop” against conservatives, while Fuentes shot back by
accusing Carlson of being the real “secret federal agent” in disguise.

Carlson acknowledged those insults and offered an apology on air for
the personal attack, and the pair laughed about their past paranoia.
They “buried the hatchet” over the “fed” accusations and found common
ground in their shared resentment of establishment Republicans.

Fuentes’s appearance on Carlson’s show has drawn widespread
condemnation. “How could Tucker interview one of the most genuinely
hateful racists and Jew-haters in the world, Nick Fuentes? Honestly, I
am shocked by that. Despicable,” wrote Christian author Eric Metaxas on
X.

Conservative commentator Dinesh D’Souza likened Carlson to a loyal dog
who “is friendly to guys like Nick Fuentes and hostile to guys like Ted
Cruz”.

The Catholic Church has historically not endorsed Zionism. Saint Pope
Pius X’s 1904 audience with Theodor Herzl highlighted this early
opposition: the pope emphasised that while Jews could freely settle in
Jerusalem, the Church could not condone a solely Jewish state.

Subsequent Vatican diplomacy maintained this view, particularly during
and after World War II, when plans for a Jewish homeland gained
international momentum. The Vatican were cautious about
Jewish-dominated Palestine that could disrupt Christian custodianship
of sacred sites.

After 1948, the Catholic position began to evolve from outright
theological rejection towards cautious political accommodation. Pope
Pius XII resisted American entreaties to recognise Israel, seeing such
recognition as premature and inconsistent with the Church’s universal
mission. Yet under Pope John XXIII, who sought reconciliation with the
Jewish people, a more open tone emerged that would culminate decades
later in formal diplomatic recognition.

The 1993 Vatican–Israel accord marked a pragmatic acknowledgment of
political reality rather than a theological endorsement of Zionism,
while subsequent agreements with the Palestine Liberation Organization
reflected the Holy See’s enduring commitment to peace and justice for
both peoples.

In 2015, Pope Francis reaffirmed this dual recognition, calling for
coexistence between two sovereign states, though some within the
Vatican now question whether a one-state model might better embody
Christian principles of equality and reconciliation.

Niwa Limbu
