**King to be first British monarch to pray with Pope in at least 500 years**

*October 17, 2025 tcnadmin*

King Charles III and Queen Camilla will make an official State visit to
the Vatican on Thursday, October 23, where they will be received by
Pope Leo XIV. The visit, confirmed by both the Holy See and Buckingham
Palace, marks a historic moment in Anglican-Catholic relations and will
focus on two key themes: Christian unity and care for the environment.

As part of the day’s events, King Charles will also be honoured with
the title of Royal Confrater of Saint Paul at the Basilica of Saint
Paul Outside the Walls, recognising the long-standing ties between the
British Crown and the Benedictine abbey attached to the basilica.

At 12 pm local time, Pope Leo XIV will lead an ecumenical prayer
service for the care of creation in the Sistine Chapel. Afterwards, a
meeting will take place in the Sala Regia with individuals and
organisations dedicated to environmental protection. Later in the
afternoon, at 2:45 pm, the King and Queen will visit the Basilica of
Saint Paul Outside the Walls, where King Charles will be formally
granted the title Royal Confrater of Saint Paul.

Buckingham Palace has described the visit as “historic,” aligning with
the Jubilee Year theme Pilgrims of Hope, and recognising the shared
ecumenical efforts between the Catholic Church and the Church of
England.

A Visit Focused on Unity and the Environment

The two central themes of the Royal visit are Christian unity and care
for the planet. At a Vatican press briefing on 17 October, Archbishop
Flavio Pace, Secretary of the Dicastery for Promoting Christian Unity,
outlined the ecumenical aspects, while Sister Alessandra Smerilli,
Secretary of the Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development,
spoke about the ecological dimension.

Originally scheduled for April, the visit also coincides with the 10th
anniversary of Pope Francis’s environmental encyclical Laudato Si’.
King Charles – who, as Supreme Governor of the Church of England, has
long been committed to interfaith engagement – specifically requested
to take part in a liturgy focused on creation care. That service will
be led jointly by Pope Leo XIV and the Archbishop of York, Stephen
Cottrell, in the Sistine Chapel.

A Hymn Bridging Traditions

The ecumenical tone of the visit will be reflected in the liturgy,
which will include a hymn by Saint Ambrose of Milan – sung in an
English translation by Saint John Henry Newman. Newman, a key figure in
Anglican-Catholic relations, was Anglican for much of his life before
becoming Catholic. He was canonised in 2019, an event King Charles
attended personally. On 1 November, Pope Leo will declare Newman a
Doctor of the Church during a major ceremony attended by a high-ranking
Anglican delegation.

Music will be provided by the Sistine Chapel Choir, alongside
choristers from the Chapel Royal at St James’s Palace and the Choir of
St George’s Chapel, Windsor Castle.

A Special Honour for the King

In the afternoon, the Royals will travel to the Basilica of Saint Paul
Outside the Walls, which maintains historical ties with the British
Crown and its adjacent Benedictine Abbey. Notably, the Abbey’s coat of
arms includes the insignia of the Order of the Garter – one of
Britain’s most prestigious honours.

To mark the occasion, King Charles will be formally named Royal
Confrater of Saint Paul by Cardinal James Michael Harvey and Abbot
Donato Ogliari, with the approval of Pope Leo XIV. “It is a sign of
honour and spiritual communion,” said Archbishop Pace.

A specially designed chair bearing King Charles’s coat of arms and the
Latin inscription Ut unum sint (“That they may be one” – John 17:21)
will be used during the ceremony. The chair will remain in the
Basilica’s apse and will be available for use by the King and his
successors on future visits.

Shared Stewardship of the Planet

Following the ecumenical prayer service, Pope Leo and King Charles will
participate in a private meeting in the Sala Regia with Church leaders,
business figures, environmental advocates, and UN experts.
Representatives from the Laudato Si’ Movement will also attend.

“This meeting underscores the strong relationship between the Catholic
and Anglican Churches on environmental issues,” said Sister Smerilli.
“Pope Francis often reminds us that everything is connected, and that
environmental and social crises must be addressed together. Pope Leo
has continued this approach with further action.”

She highlighted recent initiatives such as the July 9 celebration of
the new Missa pro custodia creationis (Mass for the Protection of
Creation) and the upcoming inauguration of the Borgo Laudato Si’ on
September 5, 2025. Sister Smerilli also praised the King’s efforts to
bring the private sector on board in the fight against climate change
and biodiversity loss.

Looking Ahead

Both Archbishop Pace and Sister Smerilli emphasised the long-term
significance of this visit. “It marks a historic moment in the journey
of reconciliation between our Churches,” said Archbishop Pace. “It
celebrates how far we’ve come-and offers hope for the future.”

Sister Smerilli agreed, calling it a powerful symbol of unity and
shared responsibility for the environment: “These are themes that
matter more than ever-for the generations to come.”
