
Min read
share

Pope Leo XIV has announced that he will declare St John Henry Newman a
Doctor of the Church on 1 November, during celebrations for the Jubilee
of the World of Education.

The announcement was made on 28 September in St Peter’s Square at the
conclusion of Mass for the Jubilee of Catechists. Right before the
Angelus, the Pope said: “I have the joy of announcing that on 1
November, in the context of the Jubilee of World Education, I will
confer the title of Doctor of the Church on Saint John Henry Newman.”

Prior to the announcement, in the Pope’s homily delivered to tens of
thousands gathered in the square, he reflected on the parable of
Lazarus and the rich man from the Gospel of St Luke.

The Holy Father spoke of how Lazarus, forgotten at the gates of the
wealthy, was remembered by God. The Holy Father warned that “many
Lazaruses” exist today, suffering amid greed, injustice and
indifference, and he urged the faithful to rediscover charity as the
root of authentic Christian witness. Faith, he said, is not a private
possession but a gift handed down through testimony and love.

The Pope used the occasion to highlight the vocation of catechists as
“living echoes” of the faith. Drawing on the origins of the word
itself, from the Greek katēchein, he stressed that catechesis must not
be reduced to instruction alone but should be a personal encounter that
leaves an indelible mark on the heart.

Parents, he reminded the faithful, are the first catechists, passing on
the language of faith to their children in the home. In recalling St
Augustine, he insisted that catechesis must inspire belief, hope and
love.

Making the announcement, His Holiness pointed to Newman’s profound
contribution to a renewed theological vision and his seminal insights
into the development of Christian doctrine, which have shaped Catholic
thought far beyond the nineteenth century.

Newman’s legacy has long stood at the heart of modern Catholic identity
in Britain. His writings on conscience, faith and the organic growth of
doctrine have resonated deeply within the universal Church, influencing
the Second Vatican Council and the teaching that followed.

John Henry Newman was born in London in 1801 and was a leading figure
of the Oxford Movement before his conversion to Catholicism in 1845.
Ordained a Catholic priest in 1847, he was later created cardinal by
Pope Leo XIII in 1879. His major works, including An Essay on the
Development of Christian Doctrine and The Idea of a University,
continue to be widely studied. He died in 1890 and was beatified by
Pope Benedict XVI in Birmingham in 2010, before his canonisation by
Pope Francis in 2019.

Having founded the Birmingham Oratory in 1848, there are now seven
established Oratorian communities or Oratories-in-formation across the
United Kingdom. With more brothers in training for the priesthood than
any diocese in the country, they are a beacon of Catholic revival.

For English Catholics, the announcement carries particular
significance. Newman, who was canonised in 2019, becomes the first
modern English saint to receive the honour, affirming not only his
theological genius but also the enduring contribution of English
Catholicism to the wider Church.

‍

Pope Leo XIV has announced that he will declare St John Henry Newman a
Doctor of the Church on 1 November, during celebrations for the Jubilee
of the World of Education.

The announcement was made on 28 September in St Peter’s Square at the
conclusion of Mass for the Jubilee of Catechists. Right before the
Angelus, the Pope said: “I have the joy of announcing that on 1
November, in the context of the Jubilee of World Education, I will
confer the title of Doctor of the Church on Saint John Henry Newman.”

Prior to the announcement, in the Pope’s homily delivered to tens of
thousands gathered in the square, he reflected on the parable of
Lazarus and the rich man from the Gospel of St Luke.

The Holy Father spoke of how Lazarus, forgotten at the gates of the
wealthy, was remembered by God. The Holy Father warned that “many
Lazaruses” exist today, suffering amid greed, injustice and
indifference, and he urged the faithful to rediscover charity as the
root of authentic Christian witness. Faith, he said, is not a private
possession but a gift handed down through testimony and love.

The Pope used the occasion to highlight the vocation of catechists as
“living echoes” of the faith. Drawing on the origins of the word
itself, from the Greek katēchein, he stressed that catechesis must not
be reduced to instruction alone but should be a personal encounter that
leaves an indelible mark on the heart.

Parents, he reminded the faithful, are the first catechists, passing on
the language of faith to their children in the home. In recalling St
Augustine, he insisted that catechesis must inspire belief, hope and
love.

Making the announcement, His Holiness pointed to Newman’s profound
contribution to a renewed theological vision and his seminal insights
into the development of Christian doctrine, which have shaped Catholic
thought far beyond the nineteenth century.

Newman’s legacy has long stood at the heart of modern Catholic identity
in Britain. His writings on conscience, faith and the organic growth of
doctrine have resonated deeply within the universal Church, influencing
the Second Vatican Council and the teaching that followed.

John Henry Newman was born in London in 1801 and was a leading figure
of the Oxford Movement before his conversion to Catholicism in 1845.
Ordained a Catholic priest in 1847, he was later created cardinal by
Pope Leo XIII in 1879. His major works, including An Essay on the
Development of Christian Doctrine and The Idea of a University,
continue to be widely studied. He died in 1890 and was beatified by
Pope Benedict XVI in Birmingham in 2010, before his canonisation by
Pope Francis in 2019.

Having founded the Birmingham Oratory in 1848, there are now seven
established Oratorian communities or Oratories-in-formation across the
United Kingdom. With more brothers in training for the priesthood than
any diocese in the country, they are a beacon of Catholic revival.

For English Catholics, the announcement carries particular
significance. Newman, who was canonised in 2019, becomes the first
modern English saint to receive the honour, affirming not only his
theological genius but also the enduring contribution of English
Catholicism to the wider Church.

‍
