After Manchester synagogue attack, society needs a renewed commitment to
cohesion

October 3, 2025 [21]tcnadmin

During a recent trip to Brussels, I had the occasion to walk past each
day the Ohel Eliezer Synogogue at the EU (The European Shul). Located
in Rue Froissart, in Brussels’ Etterbeek European district, the
synagague is just a few doors away from the Brussels International
Catholic School, the Catholic University of Portugal and the Foyer
Catholique Européen.

In what was otherwise a quiet and peaceful urban street it was both
noticeable and unnerving to pass the synagogue entrance each morning
under the watchful and nervous eyes of the two security guards armed
with assault rifles and a spotter stationed outside the doorway.
Somehow, in the very beating heart of the diverse buildings that
comprised the engine room of the European community was a salutary
reminder that, for some groups at least, the threat of violence was an
ever-present reality.

For the Jewish community it’s a threat that has haunted and followed
them throughout history – and things aren’t getting any better. Hate
incidents have reached record levels here in the UK – the Community
Security Trust (CST), an organisation that monitors antisemitism in the
UK, has recorded a total of 1,521 incidents in the first half of 2025.
Public outrage at the Israeli governments actions in Gaza has
erroneously and dangerously conflated the genocide being carried out by
the Netanyahu government with the position of the country’s general
Jewish population – the majority of whom actually do not support their
government’s actions.

Lateral moments have also been extremely damaging  – for instance
dangerous and derogatory comments made by punk duo Bob Vylan at this
year’s Glastonbury festival, in which they led chants of “death, death
to the IDF [Israel Defence Forces]”. Following a police investigation
singer Pascal Robinson-Foster was forced to clarify that he was not
calling for the death of Jews, but only for the dismantling of “a
violent military machine.” No doubt for some the distinction was
already self-evident, but many argue that trigger events and blurred
narratives like these only serve to deepen, shape and drive negative
rhetoric towards ethnic, racial, cultural and other minority groups.

Quite why antisemitism has been such a persistent and pervasive
prejudice is hard to establish; its roots stretch back into ancient
history, far beyond even the time when Christian theology blamed the
Jews for Jesus’ crucifixion, or literature invented the Wandering Jew
who taunted Jesus at Calvary and was thus doomed to wander unloved
until the end of the world. It’s quite shocking to realise that such
irrational prejudices even existed as early as 628BC, when Muhammad and
a large Muslim army besieged Khaybar, an oasis in Medina Province in
modern day Saudi Arabia that had been home to an established Jewish
community. The chant of “Khaybar, Khaybar, oh Jews! The army of
Muhammad will return!’ was a rallying call of that conflict that even
remains in circulation today amongst some anti-semitic groups.

In many respects the mythical Jew has ever served as an all too
convenient scapegoat for the ills of secular society. One only has to
consider the damning accusations of antisemitism within the Labour
Party in the days of Ken Livingstone and Jeremy Corbeyn to realise that
such warped attitudes can seep into even the most apparently altruistic
of circles.

The Catholic writer Hiliare Belloc, who spent much of his life fighting
against (debatable) accusations of antisemitism in his writings, argued
that the essence of the antagonism towards the Jewish people was
centred on their apparent control of global economic activity and the
money markets, which outsiders believed was controlled and perpetuated
by the Jewish community’s enclosed and self-serving attitude to
commerce. In his time Belloc may have objected on Catholic and
egalitarian grounds to the English Jewish community’s (or indeed any
one group’s) control of the silver and diamond markets, but he was
equally reticent that the strength of the Jewish hold on commerce was
down to its commitment to family, community and the support of one’s
neighbour.

What Belloc recognised was that over the centuries the Jewish community
had been driven to finance as a result of its rigorous exclusion from
other areas of economic activity and had achieved success in these
areas despite most Jews living in desperate, exclusional poverty.

At the most fundamental level of human psychology, it is jealousy that
has driven much antisemitism over the centuries, especially as society
has moved away from its communal spiritual roots embrace increasingly a
divisive and competitive secularism.

Thus it’s no coincidence that many of the severest criticisms of Jewish
culture have come from those with the most secular of societal
outlooks. For instance, despite having Jewish ancestry himself, Karl
Marx was deeply antisemitic, and even condemned modern capitalism as
being the result of the ‘judiasing’ of Christianity.

It’s worth remembering that in the 18th century in England Jews had no
political rights and were not allowed to purchase property and thus had
to eke out a living for themselves and their families by trading as
pedlars and hawkers, selling second-hand goods and jewellery. No more
so was this the case than in Manchester, where a small Jewish community
set up at the end of the 18th century has grown to become today the
second largest Jewish community in Britain. The long, illustrious and
ofttimes tortuous story of the Manchester Jewish community is well
documented in the Manchester Jewish Museum in Cheetham Hill, just a few
miles down the A665 from the Heaton Park Synagogue where yesterday’s
dreadful attack took place.

With two synagogue members and the attacker dead, and three other
people still seriously ill in hospital, it’s still too early to know
what brought about the outrage – Jihad Al-Shamie, a 35 year old British
citizen of Syrian descent is thought by Counter Terrorism Police
investigating the incident to have possibly been influenced by “extreme
Islamist ideology”, but investigations are still ongoing, and widening.

By any accounts this is a tragedy that will need considerable healing,
especially for those within the Manchester Jewish community closest to
the synagogue. For the wider UK Jewish community many are saying that
this is exactly the type of horror that they have been warning about
for a long time now, and it’s certainly the reason why armed security
guards are a common and essential site outside of synagogues and other
Jewish meeting places, not only here in the UK but across the world.

Speaking to ITV News this morning, the Jewish Representative Council of
Greater Manchester and Region (JRC) described the assault as “the
culmination of two years of constant Jew hatred”.

In a statement, the organisation also said “the community’s worst fears
came true … It is an event that every Jewish person in the UK has
feared.”

For legislators the Heaton Park attack is a particularly challenging
and serious development, and it’s little wonder that on hearing the
news the prime minister dashed back from a summit of European leaders
in Copenhagan to host an emergency COBRA meeting, and announce that
additional funds and policing would be made available to protect Jewish
localities.

Whilst this may help to address local community security issues, the
government is also in an understandable state of panic about the
broader picture of civil unrest which is becoming an increasing
possibility. More than other situation in recent memory, the Hamas
attack of 7th October 2023 and Israel’s subsequent response to it in
Gaza has consumed large elements of society and polarised all manner of
opinions, and these profound divisions have seeped out into other areas
where humans differ profoundly.

The great concern for those who govern is that grievances have a habit
of fragmenting and expanding, especially if they are unaddressed or
misdiagnosed. If one looks at the rise of social unrest over recent
years, more than 100 countries have witnessed some 440 significant
anti-government protests over the past five years and whilst most have
been driven by political polarisation and economic inequality, the
igniting factors have almost always been random incidents that have
brought together otherwise diametrically opposed factions and
viewpoints.

This is where governments need to act with particular caution and
intelligence if they are to ameliorate grievances and present solutions
that are likely to be accepted in the interests of a peaceful and
harmonious society. As HE Cardinal Vincent Nichols said in reaction to
yesterday’s attack: “It is a duty of us all to work together to ensure
a more cohesive and respectful society, one in which such violence and
inhumanity have no place.”

Sadly, here in the UK at present there seems to be little evidence from
anywhere on the political spectrum of this essential kind of
eruditeness. From dubbing large swathes of the general population as
far right thugs, to uniting the population in opposition to compulsory
ID cards, one senses that we are currently in the grip of a worrying
and inexplicable draw towards inflammatory, rather than reconciliatory,
politics.

Such a strategy is rarely successful, and serves only to deepen
divisions and antagonisms within society at a time when powerful voices
for the value of intrinsic human worth are desperately needed. If we
can’t get to that, events like the horrific Heaton Park Synagogue
attack will sadly become familiar and persistent tragedies, rather than
merely  isolated incidents.

Please do remember all those affected by yesterday’s dreadful events in
your prayers.

Joseph Kelly is as Catholic writer and public theologian
