The Vatican has announced that Englishman Saint Cardinal John Henry
Newman will join the great medieval theologian St Thomas Aquinas as an
official co-patron of the Church’s educational mission.

The move coincides with the forthcoming proclamation that Newman will
become the 38th Doctor of the Church, to be formally declared at the
closing Mass of the Jubilee of the World of Education on 1 November.

The cardinal prefect of the Dicastery for Culture and Education
revealed at a press conference that “the Pope will name St John Henry
Newman ‘co-patron of the Church’s educational mission, alongside St
Thomas Aquinas’.”

A papal document will also be published on 28 October to mark the 60th
anniversary of the Second Vatican Council’s declaration Gravissimum
Educationis on Christian education.

According to the announcement, the text honours a “spiritual and
pedagogical heritage” that remains relevant in today’s world and warns
that “history challenges us with a new urgency … rapid and profound
changes expose children, adolescents, and young people to unprecedented
vulnerabilities.”

The Pope adds that “it is not enough to preserve: we must relaunch” and
calls on educators to “recompose knowledge and meaning, competence and
responsibility, faith and life.”

The Jubilee itself runs from 27 October to 1 November and will gather
around 20,000 pilgrims, culminating on the solemnity of All Saints when
Newman is to be declared Doctor of the Church.

The Vatican estimates that Catholic schools and universities across 171
countries serve almost 72 million students. According to figures shared
at the press conference, there are 230,000 Catholic universities and
schools worldwide. The choice of Newman highlights his enduring
influence on the philosophy of education, curricular development, and
the integration of faith and reason.

Since St Thomas Aquinas was declared patron of all Catholic educational
establishments by Pope Leo XIII in 1880, Newman’s appointment marks the
first time in almost a century and a half that a new patron has been
named.

The Vatican has announced that Englishman Saint Cardinal John Henry
Newman will join the great medieval theologian St Thomas Aquinas as an
official co-patron of the Church’s educational mission.

The move coincides with the forthcoming proclamation that Newman will
become the 38th Doctor of the Church, to be formally declared at the
closing Mass of the Jubilee of the World of Education on 1 November.

The cardinal prefect of the Dicastery for Culture and Education
revealed at a press conference that “the Pope will name St John Henry
Newman ‘co-patron of the Church’s educational mission, alongside St
Thomas Aquinas’.”

A papal document will also be published on 28 October to mark the 60th
anniversary of the Second Vatican Council’s declaration Gravissimum
Educationis on Christian education.

According to the announcement, the text honours a “spiritual and
pedagogical heritage” that remains relevant in today’s world and warns
that “history challenges us with a new urgency … rapid and profound
changes expose children, adolescents, and young people to unprecedented
vulnerabilities.”

The Pope adds that “it is not enough to preserve: we must relaunch” and
calls on educators to “recompose knowledge and meaning, competence and
responsibility, faith and life.”

The Jubilee itself runs from 27 October to 1 November and will gather
around 20,000 pilgrims, culminating on the solemnity of All Saints when
Newman is to be declared Doctor of the Church.

The Vatican estimates that Catholic schools and universities across 171
countries serve almost 72 million students. According to figures shared
at the press conference, there are 230,000 Catholic universities and
schools worldwide. The choice of Newman highlights his enduring
influence on the philosophy of education, curricular development, and
the integration of faith and reason.

Since St Thomas Aquinas was declared patron of all Catholic educational
establishments by Pope Leo XIII in 1880, Newman’s appointment marks the
first time in almost a century and a half that a new patron has been
named.
