Iran, Russia, China: the rising axis threatening Britain

By
Kasra Aarabi
Opinion

Iran, Russia, China: the rising axis threatening Britain

A Shaheed drone on the Commons floor is a warning the UK can no longer
afford to ignore. Tougher action against Tehran, Moscow and Beijing
must follow

October 30, 2025 15:53

LONDON, ENGLAND - OCTOBER 14: Tom Tugendhat, MP for Tonbridge,
addresses guests while standing with the downed Iranian-made Shahed-136
attack drone, used by Russia in Ukraine, at the Houses of Parliament on
October 14, 2025 in London, England. The event was organised by United
Against Nuclear Iran (UANI), a US-based organisation that aims to
combat the threat of Iran's nuclear programme, and was intended to
highlight the Iranian regime's role in Russia's aggression in Europe.
The drone is the same weapon Russia has used to extensively against
Ukraine, where Russia has allegedly deployed 38,000 drones in 2025
alone. Last month, Polish and NATO forces had to intercept different
kinds of Russian drones - some of which appeared to be decoys - that
entered Poland's airspace, which led Poland to trigger NATO's Article
4, underscoring the perceived threat to European security. (Photo by
Leon Neal/Getty Images)
3 min read

Imagine acquiring an Iranian Shahed-136 drone from Ukraine, then
presenting it in the UK Parliament to spotlight the sinister military
partnership between Putin and the Ayatollah. Well, I did exactly that –
and doing so really brought to life the threat we face from this new
axis of terror.

Designed in Iran, built with Chinese technology, and fired by Russia,
the Shahed-136 has become Putin’s weapon of choice in Ukraine. The
tyrant in Moscow has deployed these kamikaze drones to wage a campaign
of indiscriminate violence against civilians and critical
infrastructure. More than 38,000 Shaheds have been launched by Russia
in 2025 alone.

But the footprint of this Iranian weapon system is not confined to
Ukraine. Today, the Shahed-136 is the most ubiquitous terror weapon of
mass destruction in the world. Iran’s regime has not only used this
terror weapon itself, but has also supplied it to the worst terror
groups and rogue states, such as Hezbollah, the Houthis, Iraqi Shia
militias, the Assad regime in Syria, Russia, and Belarus. In doing so,
Shahed drones have maimed and killed citizens in more than 80
countries, including British nationals.

But the Shahed is more than just a lethal drone. It is the true face of
the now well-established troika of Iran, Russia, and China – an
anti-Western axis that is operating in the UK with very little
scrutiny.

For years, Britain has been in denial about the existence of an
alliance between Khamenei, Putin, and Xi. This is despite the fact that
all three actors are working in tandem to undermine British democracy
through a combination of disinformation, espionage, cyber-attacks and
acts of transnational repression, not least against British
parliamentarians. The bureaucrats in Whitehall, however, either flatly
reject the idea of this troika or, at best, claim it is merely a
tactical marriage of convenience.

But the relationship between Khamenei, Putin, and Xi runs far deeper
than a casual “friends with benefits” fling. It is a marriage of ideas.
Hostility toward liberal democracy and Western values is the glue that
binds these otherwise unlikely bedfellows together. Their shared vision
is centred on a collective clash with Western civilisation. Iran’s
regime has perhaps articulated this most vividly, describing a new
world order built on three poles, each in direct confrontation with
Western civilisation: an Islamic pole led by Khamenei, a Russo-Slavic
pole led by Putin, and a Chinese-Confucian pole led by Xi.
And while the British government continues to burry its head in the
sand, the most lethal part of the Tehran-Moscow-Beijing partnership has
only been deepening.
Earlier this year, Russia and Iran signed a 20-year comprehensive
strategic agreement aimed at deepening military ties, including greater
intelligence sharing and cooperation. This agreement with
Moscow follows Tehran’s 25-year strategic agreement with Beijing –
worth a staggering

$400 billion – that focusses on oil, sanctions evasions, missile
technology, cyberwarfare and intelligence sharing.
And while civil servants may dismiss such agreements as either
exaggerated or outright meaningless, the physical presence of an
Iranian Shahed-136 drone in Parliament tells a very different story –
one that cannot be denied.

But the worst is still to come. There is clear evidence that Russia,
China, and Iran are stepping up their efforts to target Britain –
increasingly coordinating in ways that go far beyond mere
disinformation campaigns.

New intelligence reveals that Iranian regime proxies from Yemen and
Iraq under the control of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC) have, for the first time, been deployed to support Putin’s war
in Ukraine – a development that could herald a new era in the way both
regimes conduct transnational repression and terrorism. Such
collaboration would allow Tehran and Moscow to collectively wage
attacks against Western interests while maintaining enough plausible
deniability to avoid direct consequences.

Of course, China is less likely to directly get its hands dirty when it
comes to hard confrontation. However, as the Shahed-136 exemplifies, it
is Chinese technology and money that will ultimately bankroll much of
this hostile activity against the West.

To counter this growing threat, Britain must act fast and decisively.
First, the IRGC must be proscribed as a terrorist organisation to fully
inhibit its ability to operate in Britain. The IRGC is stepping up its
efforts to not only conduct acts of terror and espionage in the UK, but
is also using the same methods as ISIS and Al-Qaeda to nurture
home-grown radicalisation on British soil.

Next, China should immediately be added to the enhanced tier of the
newly created Foreign Influence Registration Scheme (FIRS), designed to
protect against hostile state activity in Britain. While Russia and
Iran’s regime have been designated under FIRS’ enhanced tier, China –
which equally engages in industrial scale espionage – has yet to be
added. Finally, the UK must take action against illicit Iranian and
Russian oil sales to China by targeting Tehran and Moscow’s “ghost
fleet” (vessels with obscured ownership used to avoid sanctions) – a
course of action that would disrupt the flow of funds that bankroll
these hostile activities.
These measures would underline that Britain is serious about defending
its national security and countering the Tehran-Moscow-Beijing axis.
The truth is the government has been asleep at the wheel for far too
long – now is the time to finally wake up.

Kasra Aarabi is the director for IRGC research at United Against
Nuclear Iran and a British-Iranian expert on Iran’s military-security
apparatus
