____________________

[9]Quam Singulari - Decree of the Sacred Congregation of the Discipline of
the Sacraments on First Communion, 8 August 1910

[10][Pope Saint Pius X] The pages of the Gospel show clearly how
special was that love for children which Christ showed while He was on
earth. It was His delight to be in their midst; He was wont to lay His
hands on them; He embraced them; and He blessed them. At the same time
He was not pleased when they would be driven away by the disciples,
whom He rebuked gravely with these words: "Let the little children come
to me, and do not hinder them, for of such is the kingdom of God." It
is clearly seen how highly He held their innocence and the open
simplicity of their souls on that occasion when He called a little
child to Him and said to the disciples: "Amen, I say to you, unless you
turn and become like little children, you will not enter into the
kingdom of heaven....And whoever receives one such little child for my
sake, receives me."

The Catholic Church, bearing this in mind, took care even from the
beginning to bring the little ones to Christ through Eucharistic
Communion, which was administered even to nursing infants. This, as was
prescribed in almost all ancient Ritual books, was done at Baptism
until the thirteenth century, and this custom prevailed in some places
even later. It is still found in the Greek and Oriental Churches. But
to remove the danger that infants might eject the Consecrated Host, the
custom obtained from the beginning of administering the Eucharist to
them under the species of wine only.

Infants, however, not only at the time of Baptism, but also frequently
thereafter were admitted to the sacred repast. In some churches it was
the custom to give the Eucharist to the children immediately after the
clergy; in others, the small fragments which remained after the
Communion of the adults were given to the children.

This practice later died out in the Latin Church, and children were not
permitted to approach the Holy Table until they had come to the use of
reason and had some knowledge of this august Sacrament. This new
practice, already accepted by certain local councils, was solemnly
confirmed by the Fourth Council of the Lateran, in 1215, which
promulgated its celebrated Canon XXI, whereby sacramental Confession
and Holy Communion were made obligatory on the faithful after they had
attained the use of reason, in these words: "All the faithful of both
sexes shall, after reaching the years of discretion, make private
confession of all their sins to their own priest at least once a year,
and shall, according to their capacity, perform the enjoined penance;
they shall also devoutly receive the Sacrament of Holy Eucharist at
least at Easter time unless on the advice of their own priest, for some
reasonable cause, it be deemed well to abstain for a while."

The Council of Trent, in no way condemning the ancient practice of
administering the Eucharist to children before they had attained the
use of reason, confirmed the Decree of the Lateran Council and declared
anathema those who held otherwise: "If anyone denies that each and all
Christians of both sexes are bound, when they have attained the years
of discretion, to receive Communion every year at least at Easter, in
accordance with the precept of Holy Mother Church, let him be
anathema."

In accord with this Decree of the Lateran Council, still in effect, the
faithful are obliged, as soon as they arrive at the years of
discretion, to receive the Sacraments of Penance and Holy Eucharist at
least once a year.

However, in the precise determination of "the age of reason or
discretion" not a few errors and deplorable abuses have crept in during
the course of time. There were some who maintained that one age of
discretion must be assigned to reception of the Sacrament of Penance
and another to the Holy Eucharist. They held that for Confession the
age of discretion is reached when one can distinguish right from wrong,
hence can commit sin; for Holy Eucharist, however, a greater age is
required in which a full knowledge of matters of faith and a better
preparation of the soul can be had. As a consequence, owing to various
local customs and opinions, the age determined for the reception of
First Communion was placed at ten years or twelve, and in places
fourteen years or even more were required; and until that age children
and youth were prohibited from Eucharistic Communion.

This practice of preventing the faithful from receiving on the plea of
safeguarding the august Sacrament has been the cause of many evils. It
happened that children in their innocence were forced away from the
embrace of Christ and deprived of the food of their interior life; and
from this it also happened that in their youth, destitute of this
strong help, surrounded by so many temptations, they lost their
innocence and fell into vicious habits even before tasting of the
Sacred Mysteries. And even if a thorough instruction and a careful
Sacramental Confession should precede Holy Communion, which does not
everywhere occur, still the loss of first innocence is always to be
deplored and might have been avoided by reception of the Eucharist in
more tender years.

No less worthy of condemnation is that practice which prevails in many
places prohibiting from Sacramental Confession children who have not
yet made their First Holy Communion, or of not giving them absolution.
Thus it happens that they, perhaps having fallen into serious sin,
remain in that very dangerous state for a long time.

But worse still is the practice in certain places which prohibits
children who have not yet made their First Communion from being
fortified by the Holy Viaticum, even when they are in imminent danger
of death; and thus, when they die they are buried with the rites due to
infants and are deprived of the prayers of the Church.

Such is the injury caused by those who insist on extraordinary
preparations for First Communion, beyond what is reasonable; and they
doubtless do not realize that such precautions proceed from the errors
of the Jansenists who contended that the Most Holy Eucharist is a
reward rather than a remedy for human frailty. The Council of Trent,
indeed, teaches otherwise when it calls the Eucharist, "An antidote
whereby we may be freed from daily faults and be preserved from mortal
sins." This doctrine was not long ago strongly emphasized by a Decree
of the Sacred Congregation of the Council given on December 20, 1905.
It declared that daily approach to Communion is open to all, old and
young, and two conditions only are required: the state of grace and a
right intention.

Moreover, the fact that in ancient times the remaining particles of the
Sacred Species were even given to nursing infants seems to indicate
that no extraordinary preparation should now be demanded of children
who are in the happy state of innocence and purity of soul, and who,
amidst so many dangers and seductions of the present time have a
special need of this heavenly food.

The abuses which we are condemning are due to the fact that they who
distinguished one age of discretion for Penance and another for the
Eucharist did so in error. The Lateran Council required one and the
same age for reception of either Sacrament when it imposed the one
obligation of Confession and Communion.

Therefore, the age of discretion for Confession is the time when one
can distinguish between right and wrong, that is, when one arrives at a
certain use of reason, and so similarly, for Holy Communion is required
the age when one can distinguish between the Bread of the Holy
Eucharist and ordinary bread-again the age at which a child attains the
use of reason.

The principal interpreters of the Lateran Council and contemporaries of
that period had the same teaching concerning this Decree. The history
of the Church reveals that a number of synods and episcopal decrees
beginning with the twelfth century, shortly after the Lateran Council,
admitted children of seven years of age to First Communion. There is
moreover the word of St. Thomas Aquinas, who is an authority of the
highest order, which reads: "When children begin to have some use of
reason, so that they can conceive a devotion toward this Sacrament (the
Eucharist), then this Sacrament can be given to them."6 Ledesma thus
explains these words: "I say, in accord with common opinion, that the
Eucharist is to be given to all who have the use of reason, and just as
soon as they attain the use of reason, even though at the time the
child may have only a confused notion of what he is doing." Vasquez
comments on the same words of St. Thomas as follows: "When a child has
once arrived at the use of reason he is immediately bound by the divine
law from which not even the Church can dispense him."

The same is the teachings of St. Antoninus, who wrote: "But when a
child is capable of doing wrong, that is of committing a mortal sin,
then he is bound by the precept of Confession and consequently of
Communion." The Council of Trent also forces us to the same conclusion
when it declares: "Children who have not attained the use of reason are
not by any necessity bound to Sacramental Communion of the Eucharist."
It assigns as the only reason the fact that they cannot commit sin:
"they cannot at that age lose the grace of the sons of God already
acquired."

From this it is the mind of the Council that children are held to
Communion by necessity and by precept when they are capable of losing
grace by sin. The words of the Roman Synod, held under Benedict XIII,
are in agreement with this in teaching that the obligation to receive
the Eucharist begins, "after boys and girls attain the age of
discretion, that is, at the age in which they can distinguish this
Sacramental food, which is none other than the true Body of Jesus
Christ, from common and ordinary bread; and that they know how to
receive it with proper religious spirit."

The Roman Catechism adds this: "At what age children are to receive the
Holy Mysteries no one can better judge than their father and the priest
who is their confessor. For it is their duty to ascertain by
questioning the children whether they have any understanding of this
admirable Sacrament and if they have any desire for it."

From all this it is clear that the age of discretion for receiving Holy
Communion is that at which the child knows the difference between the
Eucharistic Bread and ordinary, material bread, and can therefore
approach the altar with proper devotion. Perfect knowledge of the
things of faith, therefore, is not required, for an elementary
knowledge suffices-some knowledge (aliqua cognitio); similarly full use
of reason is not required, for a certain beginning of the use of
reason, that is, some use of reason (aliqualis usus rationis) suffices.

To postpone Communion, therefore, until later and to insist on a more
mature age for its reception must be absolutely discouraged, and indeed
such practice was condemned more than once by the Holy See. Thus Pope
Pius IX, of happy memory, in a Letter of Cardinal Antonelli to the
Bishops of France, March 12, 1866, severely condemned the growing
custom existing in some dioceses of postponing the First Communion of
children until more mature years, and at the same time sharply
disapproved of the age limit which had been assigned. Again, the Sacred
Congregation of the Council, on March 15, 1851, corrected a
prescription of the Provincial Council of Rouen, which prohibited
children under twelve years of age from receiving First Communion.
Similarly, this Sacred Congregation of the Discipline of the
Sacraments, on March 25, 1910, in a question proposed to it from
Strasburg whether children of twelve or fourteen years could be
admitted to Holy Communion, answered: "Boys and girls are to be
admitted to the Holy Table when they arrive at the years of discretion
or the use of reason."

After careful deliberation on all these points, this Sacred
Congregation of the Discipline of the Sacraments, in a general meeting
held on July 15, 1910, in order to remove the above-mentioned abuses
and to bring about that children even from their tender years may be
united to Jesus Christ, may live His life, and obtain protection from
all danger of corruption, has deemed it needful to prescribe the
following rules which are to be observed everywhere for the First
Communion of children.

1. The age of discretion, both for Confession and for Holy Communion,
is the time when a child begins to reason, that is about the seventh
year, more or less. From that time on begins the obligation of
fulfilling the precept of both Confession and Communion.

2. A full and perfect knowledge of Christian doctrine is not necessary
either for First Confession or for First Communion. Afterwards,
however, the child will be obliged to learn gradually the entire
Catechism according to his ability.

3. The knowledge of religion which is required in a child in order to
be properly prepared to receive First Communion is such that he will
understand according to his capacity those Mysteries of faith which are
necessary as a means of salvation (necessitate medii) and that he can
distinguish between the Bread of the Eucharist and ordinary, material
bread, and thus he may receive Holy Communion with a devotion becoming
his years.

4. The obligation of the precept of Confession and Communion which
binds the child particularly affects those who have him in charge,
namely, parents, confessor, teachers and the pastor. It belongs to the
father, or the person taking his place, and to the confessor, according
to the Roman Catechism, to admit a child to his First Communion.

5. The pastor should announce and hold a General Communion of the
children once a year or more often, and he should on these occasions
admit not only the First Communicants but also others who have already
approached the Holy Table with the above-mentioned consent of their
parents or confessor. Some days of instruction and preparation should
be previously given to both classes of children.

6. Those who have charge of the children should zealously see to it
that after their First Communion these children frequently approach the
Holy Table, even daily if possible, as Jesus Christ and Mother Church
desire, and let this be done with a devotion becoming their age. They
must also bear in mind that very grave duty which obliged them to have
the children attend the public Catechism classes; if this is not done,
then they must supply religious instruction in some other way.

7. The custom of not admitting children to Confession or of not giving
them absolution when they have already attained the use of reason must
be entirely abandoned. The Ordinary shall see to it that this condition
ceases absolutely, and he may, if necessary, use legal measures
accordingly.

8. The practice of not administering the Viaticum and Extreme Unction
to children who have attained the use of reason, and of burying them
with the rite used for infants is a most intolerable abuse. The
Ordinary should take very severe measures against those who do not give
up the practice.

His Holiness, Pope Pius X, in an audience granted on the seventh day of
this month, approved all the above decisions of this Sacred
Congregation, and ordered this Decree to be published and promulgated.

He furthermore commanded that all the Ordinaries make this Decree known
not only to the pastors and the clergy, but also to the people, and he
wishes that it be read in the vernacular every year at the Easter time.
The Ordinaries shall give an account of the observance of this Decree
together with other diocesan matters every five years.

